JSON in Artificial Intelligence: Specification and
Applications
Introduction
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) is a lightweight, text-based, language-independent data interchange
format derived from JavaScript
. It defines a minimal set of syntax rules for representing structured data
in a portable way
. JSON has become ubiquitous across computing, and it plays a significant role in
artificial intelligence (AI) workflows. From dataset annotation files to model configuration and RESTful API
responses, JSON is commonly used to store and transmit data in AI systems. This paper provides an
academic overview of JSON’s formal specifications and examines its usage in AI. We discuss JSON’s syntax
and structure, its applications in data storage, training pipelines and model deployment, a comparison with
PDF and plain text formats, and considerations of performance, scalability, and security in AI contexts.
Relevant literature and official specifications (e.g., IETF RFC 8259) are cited to ground the discussion in
authoritative sources.
JSON Syntax and Structural Rules
JSON Data Types: JSON represents six data types: four primitives and two structured types. According to
the JSON standard, the primitive types are strings, numbers, booleans, and null, and the structured types
are objects and arrays
. An object in JSON is an unordered collection of name/value pairs, delimited by
curly braces { } . Each name is a string and is separated from its value by a colon, and pairs are separated
by  commas
.  An  array is  an  ordered  sequence  of  values,  enclosed  in  square  brackets  [  ]  and
separated by commas
. JSON strings are sequences of Unicode characters, typically wrapped in double
quotes, with support for escape sequences (for special characters or encoding Unicode by code point)
. Numerical values in JSON are expressed in decimal notation (with optional fractional and exponential
parts) and do not include machine-specific notation like  NaN  or  Infinity  (these are not valid JSON
literals)
.  Boolean  values  are  represented  as  the  literals  true  or  false ,  and  the  literal  null
represents an empty value
.
Syntax Rules and Encoding: JSON syntax is defined by a small set of structural characters: braces {
} ,
brackets [
] , commas , , and colon :
. These characters, along with whitespace, are used to
delimit the data structures. Insignificant whitespace (spaces, tabs, newlines) is allowed between tokens,
enabling pretty formatting without altering meaning
.  Trailing commas are not permitted after the
last item in an object or array; JSON’s grammar treats any trailing comma as a syntax error
. This
strictness means that each comma in JSON must be followed by another value, enforcing a clear end to lists.
JSON’s design favors unambiguous parsing at the cost of some flexibility (for example, comments are not
allowed in pure JSON, unlike some configuration file formats). All JSON keys (object member names) must
be quoted strings. For instance, a valid JSON object could be: 
1
1
2
3
3
2
4
5
2
6
7
8
9
1

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

{
"name": "Alice",
"age": 30,
"is_student": false,
"courses": ["Math", "Computer Science"]
}
In terms of encoding, JSON texts exchanged between systems must be encoded in UTF-8 for maximum
interoperability
. The IETF JSON specification (RFC 8259) mandates UTF-8 encoding for JSON in open
systems, reflecting the reality that nearly all JSON implementations have converged on UTF-8
. This
ensures consistent interpretation of Unicode characters across platforms. JSON is typically transmitted with
the MIME media type application/json
. 
Formal Specification: JSON’s formal grammar is defined in RFC 8259 and ECMA-404. The JSON text is
essentially a serialized value (allowing the top-level value to be an object, array, string, number, etc.). Earlier
JSON specifications required the top-level to be an object or array, but modern JSON allows any value at the
top for flexibility
. The grammar uses a precise lexical definition for numbers (e.g. an optional minus
sign, followed by digits, optionally a decimal point and fraction, and an exponent part)
. This means that
JSON numbers are typically treated as IEEE 754 double precision floats in implementations, which has
implications for precision and range
. Indeed, JSON cannot natively represent special numeric values
like Not-a-Number or infinity, since those tokens are not defined in the syntax
. Any attempt to include
such values (e.g., from a computation that produces NaN ) requires workarounds like quoting the value as
a string or using null , which complicates encoding and decoding logic. These limitations underscore that
JSON’s simplicity comes with certain expressive trade-offs.
JSON in Data Storage and Communication
JSON’s simplicity and portability have made it a popular choice for data storage formats and communication
protocols. Many systems use JSON for storing configurations, logging information, or even as a lightweight
database format. For example, document-oriented databases like MongoDB use JSON-like documents as
the primary data model. In practice, MongoDB stores data internally in a binary JSON derivative (BSON) for
efficiency, but exposes a JSON interface to developers
. This allows data to be stored and queried as rich
objects (with nested fields, lists, etc.) in a way that is both human-readable and machine-parseable. JSON
files  are  also  commonly  used  to  persist  structured  data  on  disk  –  for  instance,  configuration  files
( config.json ), application settings, or serialized objects. Unlike binary serialized formats, JSON text files
can be opened in a text editor and understood at a glance, aiding in debugging and manual editing when
necessary.
In data science and AI, it is common to use JSON for  dataset storage and annotations. A prominent
example is the COCO dataset (a standard benchmark for computer vision), which uses JSON files to store
image annotations (bounding boxes, labels, etc.) for thousands of images. The COCO format has become a
de facto standard for object detection and image segmentation tasks. As one source notes,  “COCO is a
common JSON format used for machine learning”, having gained popularity through the widespread use of
the COCO dataset as a benchmark
. In the COCO JSON schema, top-level fields include lists of images , 
annotations , and categories , each containing structured records; this illustrates JSON’s capability to
represent complex, relational data (multiple linked lists of objects) in a single file. Many other AI datasets
10
10
11
12
13
14
5
15
16
2

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

adopt similar JSON-based formats or provide JSON exports, because JSON allows encoding rich annotation
information (labels, coordinates, metadata) in a single self-describing document.
JSON is also a cornerstone of modern web communication protocols. In particular, JSON has essentially
replaced  XML  as  the  preferred  format  for  data  in  RESTful  APIs  and  web  services.  A  2023  industry
comparison observed that “most public web services provide REST APIs and transfer data in the compact and
easy-to-use JSON data interchange format”
. When an AI model is served via a web API (for example, a
sentiment analysis model behind a REST endpoint), the input is often submitted as JSON (encapsulating
features like text or image data, possibly encoded as Base64 if binary) and the output predictions are
returned as JSON. The popularity of JSON in APIs comes from its conciseness and native support in
JavaScript, which allows direct consumption by web front-ends. Even in microservice architectures within AI
systems, internal services often communicate via JSON over HTTP because it’s language-agnostic and
human-readable for troubleshooting.
Configuration and Logging: In AI training pipelines, JSON is frequently used to configure experiments or
log results. Many machine learning platforms and libraries allow saving parameters, metrics, or model
metadata as JSON. For example, an experiment tracking system might store each run’s settings (learning
rate, model type, dataset name) in a JSON record. JSON Lines (NDJSON) format, where each line is a
separate JSON object, is often used for logging streaming data or large lists of records incrementally. JSON’s
text nature means logs can be grepped and parsed with standard text processing tools, while still being
easily loadable into Python/R data structures for analysis.
JSON in AI Model Training Pipelines
Within model training workflows, JSON finds use in multiple capacities: as a format for data annotation, for
dataset interchange, and for model or experiment configuration. One key advantage of JSON in these
contexts is that it can represent hierarchical or nested information naturally, which is common in AI data. 
Data Annotations: Many supervised learning tasks require annotated data (labels, bounding boxes, etc.).
JSON is often used to store such annotations alongside the raw data. For instance, in image recognition or
object detection, a single JSON file can contain an array of objects each describing one image’s metadata
and labeled regions. Because JSON supports nesting, a complex annotation (with an image’s filename, size,
and a list of multiple labeled objects each with coordinates and categories) can be expressed in a clear tree
structure. The COCO format mentioned earlier is a paradigmatic example: it uses nested objects for images
and their annotations. This structured approach is more robust and extensible than a flat CSV or plain text –
new fields can be added to the JSON schema without breaking compatibility, as non-required keys can be
ignored by older tools. Other domains also use JSON for annotations: for example, in natural language
processing, one might use JSON lines where each line contains a JSON object with a text sample and its
annotations (such as entity tags or sentiment), allowing easy reading and writing by scripts.
Configuration  Files: JSON  is  employed  for  configuring  machine  learning  experiments  and  pipelines.
Hyperparameter settings, model architecture choices, or data preprocessing options can be written in a
JSON config file that the training script reads. JSON’s syntax (while lacking comments and more advanced
features)  is  simple  and  forces  a  clear  structure  of  key-value  pairs,  which  encourages  well-defined
configuration schemas. In scenarios where users need to modify parameters, JSON’s human-readability is a
benefit.  Some  frameworks  support  JSON  or  a  JSON-derived  syntax  for  configuration;  for  example,
TensorFlow’s  tf.train.Checkpoint  or  some  PyTorch  libraries  can  export  settings  to  JSON.  In
17
3

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

reinforcement  learning  or  complex  pipelines,  one  might  have  a  config.json  that  enumerates
environment settings, network layers, etc., which the code parses at startup. While YAML has grown popular
for  configurations  due  to  its  readability  and  ability  to  include  comments,  JSON  remains  widely  used
especially where strict syntax and interoperability are priorities.
Model Architecture and Metadata: Certain AI frameworks offer JSON serialization for model structures.
Notably,  Keras  (TensorFlow) provides  a  model.to_json()  method  that  saves  a  neural  network’s
architecture (layer types, sizes, connections) in JSON format
. This JSON can later be read to reconstruct
the  model  ( model_from_json() ),  facilitating  model  sharing  without  weights.  As  Brownlee  (2023)
describes, “Keras provides the ability to describe any model using JSON... This can be saved to a file and later
loaded... to create a new model from the JSON specification.”
. This usage highlights JSON’s role in AI for
serialization: it can capture complex in-memory objects (like neural network graphs) in a standard text form.
Similarly, JSON often appears in metadata files accompanying trained models—e.g., a model_card.json
containing information about a model’s intended use, or a vocab.json  mapping tokens to indices in NLP
models. These JSON files are easy for other programs or services to consume when integrating the model
into a larger system.
Dataset Exchange: When sharing datasets, JSON is a common denominator format because it can be
parsed in virtually any programming language. Annotations in JSON (as opposed to a binary format) enable
researchers to quickly inspect and modify the data. Many open datasets in AI are distributed with JSON
metadata or use JSON-based standards (for instance, many NLP corpora on platforms like Hugging Face
Datasets include a JSON or JSONL version). The self-describing nature (each value is paired with a field
name) reduces ambiguity, which is valuable when different teams or tools use the data.
JSON in Model Deployment and Inference
In  deploying  AI  models  for  inference  (whether  in  a  cloud  service  or  embedded  application),  JSON  is
frequently used for input and output formats. This is especially true when models are deployed behind
RESTful APIs. For example, TensorFlow Serving, a popular system for serving trained models, provides a REST
API where  requests and responses are JSON objects
. The request JSON might contain inputs (e.g.,
feature values or an encoded image) under predefined keys, and the response JSON contains the model’s
predictions or outputs in a structured form. The TensorFlow Serving documentation specifies that the REST
response  will  be  a  JSON  representation  of  the  underlying  gRPC  response  message,  and  even  error
messages are returned as JSON with an "error"  field
. This design allows easy integration with web
clients and simplifies debugging (since the output can be read as text). 
Consider an example of a deployed image classification model: a client might send an HTTP POST with a
JSON body like  {"image_data": "<base64-encoded image>"} , and receive a JSON reply such as
{"predictions":  [{"label":  "cat",  "confidence":  0.98},  {"label":  "dog",
 
"confidence": 0.01}]} . This response is straightforward for a calling application to parse and use.
Many cloud AI services (Google Cloud AI, AWS SageMaker, etc.) also default to JSON for REST interfacing,
because it cleanly encapsulates complex data (like a list of predictions, each with multiple attributes) and is
supported by standard HTTP libraries.
Web and Mobile Integration: When AI models are accessed from web or mobile apps, JSON is the natural
choice for data exchange. JavaScript in web pages can directly consume JSON via fetch  or AJAX calls and
18
18
19
19
4

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

manipulate the data as native objects, given that JSON is a subset of JavaScript. On mobile devices and IoT
devices, JSON’s text format is lightweight enough for network transmission and can be parsed by built-in
libraries (e.g., many languages have a simple JSON decoder). Notably, an analysis of JSON traffic on a
content delivery network found that  “mobile applications account for at least 52% of JSON traffic … and
embedded devices another 12%”, meaning nearly 2/3 of JSON data is parsed on constrained devices rather
than full web browsers
. This underlines why JSON’s ease of use across platforms is critical for AI
deployment: a model’s output in JSON can be readily used by a smartphone app or an edge device without
custom parsing logic.
Interoperability and Standardization: JSON as an interface format also aids interoperability between
different components of an AI system. For instance, a model might be written in Python and served with a
small Flask API that returns JSON; a Java application or a JavaScript front-end can consume this output
easily. Because JSON is standardized (RFC 8259 / ECMA-404) and mature, there is little ambiguity in how
data  is  encoded.  The  use  of  JSON  schemas  or  API  documentation  (like  OpenAPI/Swagger  for  REST
endpoints) can further enforce the expected structure of JSON inputs/outputs for AI services, enabling
automatic client code generation and validation. In inference workflows, JSON might also be used for
pipeline messaging – if an AI system has multiple stages (say, a text extraction stage followed by an ML
classifier), they might pass data as JSON messages through a queue or streaming platform.
Comparison to Alternative Formats: For model deployment, an alternative to JSON sometimes used is
Protocol Buffers (Protobuf) or other binary formats (especially with gRPC). While binary protocols can be
more efficient, JSON’s human-readability and web-friendliness often outweigh performance concerns for
many applications. JSON enables developers to manually inspect API calls and logs, and to use a wide array
of tools (like curl  or Postman) to interact with the model endpoints. In the context of explainable AI, JSON
is  also  useful  for  returning  rich,  nested  explanations  (for  example,  a  model  might  return  not  just  a
prediction but also a hierarchy of contributing factors or a tree of feature importances in JSON form). These
can be arbitrarily complex structures, but as long as they remain within JSON’s expressive capabilities
(objects, arrays, and primitive values), they can be transmitted and visualized or processed by downstream
consumers.
Technical Comparison: JSON vs PDF vs Plain Text
When considering data formats in AI workflows, JSON occupies a unique position as a structured text
format, distinct from binary document formats like PDF or unstructured plain text files. Here we compare
JSON with  PDF and  TXT (plain text) in terms of structure, readability, parsing, and suitability for AI
applications:
Structure: JSON is highly structured – it explicitly encodes hierarchy (through nesting of objects/
arrays) and key-value relationships. Each data element is annotated with a key (in objects) or position
(in arrays), yielding self-describing data. In contrast, PDF (Portable Document Format) is primarily a
document layout format, aimed at faithfully rendering text and graphics. Internally, a PDF file does
have a structure (sections for objects, streams, cross-reference tables, etc.), but this structure is
geared toward page description, not toward semantic data representation. The content in a PDF is
essentially  fixed  on  pages,  often  without  machine-readable  demarcation  of  logical  units  like
paragraphs or tables (unless tagged PDFs are used). As Montani (2024) quips, saying “I have the data
in a PDF” is about as meaningful as saying “I have it on my computer” – it can mean anything
. This
highlights that PDF encapsulates information in a visually formatted way that lacks a predefined
20
• 
21
5

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

schema for the actual data – text could be anywhere, in any order, possibly embedded in images or
complex layouts. Plain text (TXT) files, on the other hand, contain raw sequences of characters with
minimal structure (maybe newlines or simple delimiters). A .txt  file might hold unstructured data
(like a transcript or log) or lightweight structured data (CSV or TSV are essentially plain text with
delimiters).  But  plain  text  has  no  inherent  hierarchy or  keys:  any  structure  is  imposed  by
conventions or external agreement (e.g., a line break separating records, or a specific column order).
In summary, JSON provides a  rich, nested data model, whereas PDF is a  formatted document
container and TXT is raw text with no imposed structure.
Readability: JSON is designed to be human-readable (one of its design goals is being textual and
relatively clear)
. A JSON snippet can be understood by a developer: keys provide semantic
context, and the format uses common punctuation. However, for very large JSON files, readability
can decline without pretty-printing or grouping.  Plain text is human-readable if the content is
natural language (e.g., a paragraph of English) or simple data, but if used to encode data (say, a list
of values separated by spaces), it may be harder to interpret without knowing the format. Plain text
is easily viewable and editable in any text editor, and it’s compact for simple data, but it doesn’t self-
describe the meaning of each part. PDF files are not intended to be read as raw data; they are meant
to be read visually via a PDF viewer. The underlying PDF content is binary/ASCII mixed and typically
compressed, so opening a PDF in a text editor yields gibberish aside from a few header lines. In
effect, PDFs are human-readable only after rendering – they excel at presenting readable content to
humans (fonts, images, layout), but not at exposing that content in a way a person or simple script
can parse. In AI workflows, this means that if one is given information in PDF form (say a dataset of
scientific articles in PDF), an extra OCR or parsing step is needed to make that information machine-
usable, whereas JSON or structured text could be read directly. The readability advantage of JSON
(and plain text) also aids transparency: one can open a JSON config or output and inspect it, which is
not possible with a PDF without specialized tools.
Parsing  and  Data  Extraction: JSON  is  straightforward  to  parse  by  machines  –  virtually  all
programming languages offer JSON parsers that convert JSON text into native data structures (e.g.,
dictionaries, lists, etc.). The parsing process is unambiguous due to JSON’s strict grammar. JSON’s
structure means that once parsed, data can be accessed via keys or indices, making extraction of
specific fields trivial.  Plain text requires custom parsing logic or use of simple delimiters. For
example, if data is stored as comma-separated values in a .txt file, a developer must split lines by
commas and know which column is which (or use a CSV library). If the plain text is unstructured (like
free-form  text),  extracting  specific  information  (e.g.,  numbers  or  names)  might  require  regular
expressions or AI methods (like NLP techniques). PDF parsing is notably complex: as one technical
blog on NLP and PDFs notes,  “processing PDFs is hard”
. A PDF parser must interpret the page
structure, text blocks, fonts, and sometimes even perform OCR if the text is embedded as an image.
Extracting a table or a figure caption from PDF programmatically can be challenging because the
format doesn’t guarantee a logical reading order or explicit tags (unless the PDF is tagged, which
many are not). For AI workflows that need to get data out of PDFs (e.g., text for language modeling
or forms for information extraction), considerable effort is spent on parsing – using libraries like
PDFBox, PyPDF, or advanced layout understanding models. In contrast, extracting data from JSON is
trivial in comparison. As a result,  JSON is far more suitable as an input/output format for AI
pipelines, whereas PDFs often represent raw data sources that need conversion to text/JSON for
analysis. Montani (2024) emphasizes  getting your data out of PDFs as early as possible in an ML
pipeline, converting it to a structured form for exactly this reason
.
• 
22
• 
23
21
6

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Suitability for AI Workflows: JSON is well-suited for AI in roles where structured data exchange is
needed. During model training, JSON can provide input annotations or configuration in a readily
digestible way. During inference, JSON serves as a lingua franca between services and as a logging
format. AI systems also produce outputs (predictions, explanations) that are naturally structured –
JSON captures these without losing structure. For example, a complex prediction output (say, a
hierarchy of categories detected in an image) can be returned as a nested JSON object. Plain text is
most suitable in AI primarily for scenarios like training NLP models (where raw text is the substance
to learn from). Large language models are often trained on massive plain text corpora (e.g., web
text) because the goal is to learn language patterns from unstructured text. In such cases, plain text
is indeed the data itself, and JSON would be an unnecessary wrapper. However, even in NLP, if one
has labeled data (like sentences with labels or QA pairs), these are often stored in JSON or CSV rather
than pure plain text, to include the labels and IDs. Plain text also appears in simpler logging or quick
outputs, but it lacks standardization – each plain text dataset might have its own format that needs
to be interpreted. PDFs have niche roles in AI: they are often sources of data (many documents are
only available as PDF scans) or used for reporting results (an AI system might generate a PDF report
for human end-users). They are not used  internally for computation due to the parsing difficulty
discussed. In terms of performance, JSON and plain text are lightweight text that can be streamed
and  processed  incrementally,  whereas  PDFs  are  heavier  (often  containing  fonts,  images,  and
requiring rendering logic). In terms of storage and versioning, JSON is amenable to line-by-line diffing
and version control (one can track changes in a JSON config easily), but PDF is binary and changes
cannot be diffed in a meaningful way.  Security-wise, JSON and plain text do not inherently carry
active content (though JSON can contain scripts as data, it won’t execute), whereas PDFs can embed
scripts or macros (PDFs support JavaScript for interactive forms, which can pose security risks if
mishandled).
In summary,  JSON provides structured, machine-friendly organization with moderate human readability,
making it ideal for the  intermediate and exchange format in AI workflows.  Plain text is unstructured but
human-centric, suitable for raw language data or very simple outputs, but it requires additional conventions
for structured information. PDF is oriented toward human consumption and publication-quality output, not
for computational ingestion – it’s an endpoint format rather than a working format for AI data processing
. AI practitioners typically convert PDFs to text/JSON, whereas they often convert JSON data into more
human-friendly formats only at the final presentation stage if needed.
Performance and Scalability Considerations
Using JSON in AI systems offers flexibility and readability, but it also raises performance and scalability
considerations, especially as data sizes grow. JSON is a textual format, which means it is less compact and
slower to parse than some binary alternatives. Every character (including structural symbols and repeating
key names) contributes to the payload size. For small messages (e.g., a single inference result), this
overhead is negligible. However, for large datasets or extremely high-throughput systems, JSON’s verbosity
can become a bottleneck.
Parsing Overhead: JSON parsing requires reading and interpreting every byte in the text. McCarthy (2024)
points out that “you can’t parse [JSON] without looking at every individual byte… your best parse speed is limited
by your CPU’s data bus throughput plus the time to classify each byte”
. Unlike binary formats (e.g., Protocol
Buffers, Avro, or MessagePack) that include length prefixes or fixed offsets allowing parsers to jump
through data, JSON has to be processed sequentially. This can make JSON parsing CPU-intensive when
• 
21
24
7

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

dealing with very large JSON structures. In AI contexts, consider a scenario of reading a JSON file with
millions of entries (perhaps a large image annotations file or a JSONlines corpus): the JSON parser will use
significant CPU and memory to construct in-memory objects. High-performance JSON libraries (like Google’s
simdjson  or ultrajson) have been developed to mitigate this, using SIMD instructions to speed up byte
scanning
, but they still operate within the fundamental cost of processing text. The space inefficiency
is  also  notable  for  numeric  data:  a  number  like  3.141592  might  be  stored  as  the  ASCII  characters
"3.141592" (7 bytes) in JSON, whereas in binary IEEE754 it would be 8 bytes but convey a much larger range
of values; more extremely, a large integer could take dozens of bytes in JSON (as digits) but only 4 or 8 bytes
in binary form. This matters when AI systems handle large arrays or tensors – JSON is not ideal for large
numeric matrices due to size and parse time. Researchers often switch to binary formats (like NumPy’s
.npy  or HDF5) for heavy numeric data, while using JSON for metadata or small configuration pieces.
Memory Usage and Streaming: A naive approach to JSON is to load the entire document into memory and
parse it into objects. This can be problematic if the JSON file is huge (e.g., a 10GB JSON file of training data).
One  advantage  of  JSON  being  text  is  that  it  can  be  streamed:  tools  and  libraries  can  parse  JSON
incrementally  (SAX-style  parsing  or  iterative  parsing)  without  holding  it  all  in  memory.  Moreover,  the
community has introduced conventions like  NDJSON (Newline-Delimited JSON) for handling large data
streams. In NDJSON, each line is a separate JSON object, so a parser can read line by line (or record by
record) without ever needing the whole file at once
. This is especially useful in big data and AI data
pipelines, where you might process records sequentially (map-reduce style) from a source. NDJSON also
plays well with line-oriented processing tools (you can, for instance, use Unix grep  or head  on it). Many
AI data pipelines (e.g., streaming logs of predictions, or incremental training data ingestion) use JSON Lines
for scalability. If a standard JSON array of millions of items were used instead, the entire array must be
parsed as one structure, which is less streaming-friendly. Thus, for scalability, adopting streaming patterns
or chunking for JSON is important. Some web APIs for AI also use streaming JSON (sending one JSON per
line over a socket or HTTP response) to continuously feed predictions.
Throughput and Latency: For real-time AI services (like a model serving 1000 requests per second), JSON
serialization/deserialization becomes part of the latency. Typically, JSON encoding/decoding is fast enough
(< microseconds to milliseconds) for moderate payloads (a few KB), but it can become a limiting factor at
extreme scale. In such cases, alternatives might be considered: e.g., using binary ProtoBuf over gRPC for
inter-service communication to reduce latency, or using simpler encoding for arrays (some APIs allow CSV
for large arrays of predictions since CSV is more compact for pure numeric data). That said, the convenience
and ubiquity of JSON often win out until performance profiling proves it a bottleneck. Modern JSON libraries
in C++, Java, or Python (with C extensions) can parse tens of MBs per second per core, which is usually
adequate. 
One interesting observation in a CDN study was that as JSON payloads got smaller on average (due to more
granular API calls), the relative overhead of parsing became higher per byte
. Many AI systems now favor
sending smaller JSON messages more frequently (microservices, micro-batching of data) rather than one
giant JSON, which can actually increase total parsing cost system-wide. This suggests a potential trade-off:
sending larger JSON blobs might be more efficient in terms of parse/setup overhead amortization, whereas
many tiny JSON messages incur repeated overhead (each message has some fixed processing cost). System
designers need to consider how they batch data in JSON – e.g., an inference service might accept an array of
100 inputs in one JSON request to improve throughput, rather than 100 separate JSON requests, if latency
allows.
25
26
27
8

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Comparison with PDF and TXT performance: Plain text (TXT) is simpler to parse than JSON if the format is
trivial (e.g., one data point per line with a single value). There’s almost no structural overhead, so it can be
read very quickly. However, the moment the text contains complex structured data, parsing it may involve
more custom logic that can be error-prone and slow (e.g., splitting by various delimiters, dealing with
escaping if needed). JSON’s advantage is that a single-pass parse gives you the data structure ready to use,
whereas naive text parsing might iterate multiple times or use regex (which can be slower). PDF, being a
binary format for documents, typically requires  much more processing than JSON to extract data (text
extraction from PDF can involve decoding font encodings, interpreting vector graphics for layout, etc.), and
is orders of magnitude slower than parsing equivalent text from JSON. For example, extracting all text from
a PDF document (say for NLP) might take seconds and considerable CPU, whereas reading the same text
from a JSON or TXT takes milliseconds. Thus, in performance-critical AI tasks, PDF input is usually avoided or
converted early.
Scalability: JSON is scalable in a horizontal sense – because it is text, it compresses well (one can gzip
JSON data to significantly reduce transmission size, and JSON compressibility is high due to repeated keys
and structure). Also, JSON being schema-free means adding new fields doesn’t break old code (unless they
are huge), which helps scalability of evolving AI systems. On the other hand, extremely deep or large JSON
structures can cause issues. For instance, a deeply nested JSON (recursive objects within objects) could lead
to stack overflow in some parsers or extreme memory usage; some parsers set limits on depth to prevent
malicious inputs from consuming resources
. Also, very large numeric arrays in JSON are inefficient – if
an AI model outputs a large vector or matrix, sending it as JSON array of numbers will be bulky. In those
cases, binary formats or at least base64 encoding binary data is considered. But base64 inflates size ~33%,
so even that is a compromise. Some AI deployments use mixed formats: e.g., for an image classification
service, the image is sent as a JPEG (binary) and the response is JSON. Or a training pipeline might keep raw
feature data in binary files and only use JSON for higher-level metadata linking those files.
Finally,  parallelism and JSON: Because JSON must be parsed sequentially, multi-threaded parsing of a
single JSON document is not straightforward (except in advanced libraries that split the file and use SIMD as
mentioned). This contrasts with, say, CSV or plain text where you can sometimes split by newline and parse
chunks independently (though you still need to assemble the final structure). For extremely large JSON, one
strategy is to split the file into chunks at known boundaries (if the JSON is an array, you can split at item
boundaries) and parse in parallel. Another strategy is to avoid single gigantic JSON files; instead, store many
small JSON files (e.g., one per data record). This can make retrieval and parsing more manageable in
distributed training scenarios (some AI training pipelines use one JSON per data point, which can be loaded
independently, at the cost of file overhead).
In summary, JSON carries some performance overhead due to being text and richly structured, but these
are  manageable  for  most  AI  uses  with  modern  computing  resources.  Techniques  like  streaming,
compression, and careful batching mitigate many issues. For truly large-scale or real-time low-latency
systems,  engineers  might  opt  for  alternative  encodings  or  limit  JSON’s  use  to  control  overhead.
Nonetheless, the flexibility and universality of JSON often justify its use despite performance costs. As
one commentary notes, JSON’s human-readability is “overhead” that might be unnecessary for machine-
only communication
, but in AI development and deployment, there’s value in that transparency during
development and debugging. The key is to use JSON where it provides benefit and not for scenarios where
its overhead would dominate (like massive tensor data or high-frequency microsecond-level IPC).
28
29
9

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Limitations and Security Aspects of JSON in AI Systems
While JSON is a convenient data format, it has inherent limitations and some security considerations that
practitioners should keep in mind when using it in AI systems.
Expressiveness Limitations: JSON’s type system is minimal, which can be a limitation for complex data.
There is no native date/time type, no binary type (raw bytes must be encoded as text, usually Base64), and
as discussed, numeric values are all treated as one generic “number” type (usually floating-point). This
means that important distinctions can be lost or require convention to interpret. For example, a timestamp
might be stored as a string (ISO 8601 format) or as a number (Unix epoch), but JSON itself doesn’t know it’s
a date – the interpretation happens in the application layer. In AI pipelines, this can lead to subtle bugs if
not documented: e.g., a model configuration might have "learning_rate": "1e-4"  as a string versus
1e-4  as a number, which in JSON are different types (the former could be ignored by a parser expecting a
numeric). Another limitation is precision: JSON numbers are often limited to double precision in practical
use
.  If  an  AI  application  needs  arbitrary  precision  integers  (for  cryptographic  protocols  or  exact
counters) or higher precision floats, JSON cannot guarantee to carry those accurately. An integer with 20+
digits might get rounded or represented in scientific notation and lose precision when parsed by a typical
JSON library. This is rarely a concern in core ML tasks, but in certain data processing it might be.
No Schema/Comments: JSON on its own does not enforce a schema. For AI data interchange, this means
senders and receivers must have an out-of-band agreement on the JSON structure (or use JSON Schema
definitions to validate). Unlike some formats (XML with XSD, or Protocol Buffers with .proto definitions),
JSON won’t prevent missing fields or mis-typed values by itself. In practice, many AI systems implement
runtime checks or use libraries to validate JSON inputs (for instance, ensuring that a prediction request
JSON has all required fields and correct types). The lack of comments in JSON is another oft-cited limitation –
configuration  files  in  JSON  cannot  include  human-readable  commentary  (developers  sometimes  work
around this by adding unused fields like  "_comment": "text"  which is generally considered a hack).
This has led to the adoption of alternative formats like YAML or TOML for configuration where human-
maintained files need comments. In the context of AI, if researchers share a JSON config for a model, they
might have to maintain separate documentation for what each field means, rather than annotating inline.
The strict syntax (no trailing commas, no comments) makes JSON less forgiving for human editing, which is
a limitation in iterative development.
Interoperability Pitfalls: Although JSON is standardized, there have been interoperability pitfalls. One
historical example is that JSON text used to be allowed in various encodings (UTF-8, UTF-16, etc.), but the
newer standard now requires UTF-8 for network transfer
. If an AI system erroneously outputs JSON in
another  encoding,  it  might  break  downstream.  Another  subtle  issue  is  Big  numbers:  some  JSON
implementations might serialize a very large integer as a numeric literal, but the receiver’s JSON parser
could  truncate  it  or  treat  it  as  string  if  out  of  range.  For  instance,  a  JSON  like  {"total":  
9007199254740993}  (which is 2^53+1) might parse differently in languages depending on their number
handling (JavaScript would lose precision since it uses 64-bit float for numbers). These are not security
issues per se, but can lead to data inaccuracies – an AI audit system might miscalculate totals if such big
numbers are involved.
Security Considerations: JSON is generally considered safer than earlier data formats like XML in terms of
injection attacks, but it is not without risks. The IETF RFC 8259 notes that since JSON’s syntax is borrowed
from JavaScript, it’s possible (in a JavaScript environment) to use the eval()  function on a JSON string, but
14
10
10

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 11
------------------------------------------------------------------------

doing so is dangerous and strongly discouraged
. If an attacker manages to supply malicious JSON
and  a  program  naively  does  eval(malicious_json) ,  they  could  execute  arbitrary  code.  The  safe
practice is to use a proper JSON parser, which will only create data structures and not execute code. This is a
well-known web security point: always use JSON.parse()  in JavaScript, not eval . Similarly, in Python or
other  languages,  one  should  not  use  general  deserialization  on  JSON  (like  Python’s  eval  or
ast.literal_eval  on untrusted input) – instead, use a JSON library that does not have execution
capabilities. Fortunately, JSON parsers in most languages simply create dictionaries/objects and are safe
against code execution by design.
Another  possible  security  issue  is  JSON  injection.  If  an  AI  system  constructs  JSON  responses  by
concatenating strings (instead of using a library), and if it embeds user-provided data, it could create invalid
or  malicious  structures.  For  example,  if  user  input  is  directly  inserted  into  a  JSON  response  without
sanitization, they might inject additional fields or break the JSON format. This risk is mitigated by always
using proper serialization functions that will escape characters as needed. Web APIs also set the Content-
Type: application/json  header so that browsers treat JSON as data. In the past, there was a concept
of “JSON Hijacking” in early AJAX applications – if a sensitive JSON was accessible via a GET request, a
malicious page could potentially load it via a  <script>  tag (since JSON is valid JavaScript syntax for
objects/arrays) and steal the data. To counter this, some APIs used to prefix JSON responses with a non-
JSON lead (while sending as text) or require POST. Nowadays, setting the correct MIME type and CORS
headers prevents JSON from being executed as script in the browser, so this is less of a concern, but it’s part
of the historical security landscape of JSON.
Denial of Service (DoS) Concerns: Like any format, JSON parsing can be abused to exhaust resources. An
adversary might send a huge JSON payload (many millions of nested elements) to an AI service expecting
JSON input, trying to crash it or make it hang. To address this, JSON parsers or the application should
enforce limits: maximum size of input, maximum nesting depth
, and perhaps maximum number of
array elements or object members. Many JSON libraries allow configuring a size limit or will throw an error
if depth is excessive. For example, a recursive 10000-level nested array could overflow the stack in some
languages. Therefore, AI systems ingesting JSON from external sources should have checks in place (e.g.,
rejecting inputs that are obviously too large or deeply nested). In training pipelines, if JSON files are loaded
from untrusted sources (say a user uploads a JSON of annotations), similar caution is warranted.
Data Integrity and Validation: JSON’s lack of a schema means that invalid or unexpected data could slip
through unless explicitly checked. In an AI system, imagine a JSON configuration is missing a crucial field
(say, "learning_rate"  is absent). The training code might either assume a default (potentially leading to
unnoticed differences in experiments) or crash later with a confusing error. To enhance security and
robustness, teams use JSON Schema or manual validation to ensure that incoming JSON conforms to what
is expected. JSON Schema is a standard that lets you define required keys, their types, ranges, etc., and can
be used to validate JSON files (for instance, one could define a schema for a model’s config file and validate
before using it, to catch any user error or tampering).
Comparison to PDF and TXT security: JSON does not carry active content like macros, which is a plus. PDFs
can contain embedded scripts or links, raising issues like PDF-based malware or the need for sandboxing
PDF readers. Plain text files are generally passive, though if an AI system interprets text in commands, it
could be tricked (but that’s more about the system using the text). JSON’s simplicity means fewer potential
vectors – it doesn’t support entity expansion like XML (avoiding the billion laughs attack), and parsers
typically handle recursion gracefully or error out. However, one should note that if an AI system stores JSON
30
28
11

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 12
------------------------------------------------------------------------

and later retrieves it, there should be proper encoding/escaping if that JSON is then embedded in HTML or a
shell context to avoid injection in those contexts (standard web sanitization practices). 
In summary, JSON is relatively secure by design (data-only, no executable aspects) but must be used with
good practices: always parse with vetted libraries (never with eval), validate structure to avoid unexpected
conditions, and guard against resource exhaustion with limits. The limitations of JSON (types, precision, lack
of comments) are generally manageable in AI workflows, but awareness of them prevents certain classes of
bugs. For instance, if an AI model output includes a NaN  (from a calculation) – since JSON cannot represent
that, the system might convert it to null  or string, which the downstream must handle. Being mindful of
such edge cases (and documenting them in API docs or data schemas) is part of building robust AI data
pipelines. Despite these caveats, JSON remains a cornerstone format because its benefits in interoperability
and ease-of-use typically outweigh the downsides, especially when mitigated by careful engineering.
Conclusion
JSON has proven to be a versatile and powerful format for data representation in artificial intelligence
contexts. Its full syntax – comprising a mere handful of structural symbols and base types – is simple yet
expressive  enough  to  model  complex  data  structures  used  in  AI,  from  nested  annotations  to  model
configurations.  We  have  seen  that  JSON’s  human-readability  and  self-describing  nature  facilitate
transparency in data storage and exchange, which is valuable during model development, debugging, and
integration. In AI model training pipelines, JSON is frequently employed for labeling data and specifying
experiments, providing a common thread from raw data to configuration files. For model deployment and
inference, JSON serves as the lingua franca in REST APIs, enabling seamless communication between
models and applications. Our technical comparison underscored that unlike PDFs (which are optimized for
human viewing) or plain text (unstructured streams of characters), JSON hits a sweet spot of being both
machine-friendly and reasonably human-comprehensible – a trait that has undoubtedly contributed to its
ubiquity.
However, using JSON in AI systems is not without challenges. In terms of performance and scalability, we
noted that JSON’s text-based format incurs parsing costs and overhead, which can impact high-scale
systems.  Strategies  such  as  streaming  (NDJSON)  and  careful  batching  can  alleviate  these  issues,  but
practitioners  should  remain  cognizant  of  JSON’s  limitations  with  very  large  or  numerous  messages.
Moreover, we discussed how JSON’s inherent limitations (limited data types, no built-in schema, no support
for special numeric values, etc.) require developers to enforce discipline via schemas or code checks to
maintain data integrity in AI workflows. On the security front, JSON is generally benign, but we highlighted
the importance of using proper parsing (to avoid code injection via eval ) and validating inputs to protect
against maliciously crafted payloads or resource exhaustion attacks
. By adhering to standard best
practices – much of which are documented in the JSON specification and related literature – AI engineers
can safely harness JSON’s capabilities.
In  conclusion,  JSON’s  role  in  artificial  intelligence  is  firmly  established:  it  is  the  glue  that  connects
components – from data preprocessing, to model configuration, to inference result delivery. Its design
aligns well with the needs of AI systems that must handle structured yet dynamic data across different
programming environments. While alternatives like binary serialization, PDFs, or raw text each have their
niches, JSON offers a balanced mix of structure and flexibility that has become integral to modern AI
pipelines. As AI systems continue to evolve, JSON’s broad adoption suggests it will remain a foundational
tool, though it may be augmented by schemas and complementary binary formats where performance is
30
12

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 13
------------------------------------------------------------------------

paramount. The key for practitioners is to leverage JSON where appropriate, mindful of its specs and
leveraging its strengths (interoperability, clarity) while mitigating its weaknesses (performance overhead,
lack of strong typing) with robust engineering. In the ever-expanding landscape of AI technology, JSON
stands out as a classic solution that continues to enable systems to “speak” a common language of data
– a crucial factor in collaborative, scalable, and transparent AI development.
References:
T. Bray, The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data Interchange Format, IETF RFC 8259, 2017
. 
A. Monus, "SOAP vs REST vs JSON – a 2023 comparison," Raygun Blog, Oct. 17, 2022
. 
Roboflow, "What is the COCO JSON Annotation Format?" (Web article)
. 
J. Brownlee, How to Save and Load Your Keras Deep Learning Model, MachineLearningMastery, 2023
. 
TensorFlow Documentation, TensorFlow Serving RESTful API Guide, accessed 2025
. 
I. Montani, "From PDFs to AI-ready structured data: a deep dive," Explosion AI Blog, Dec 2, 2024
. 
O. Pereverzieva, "Structured vs Unstructured Data Explained," AltexSoft Blog, Dec 16, 2024
. 
S. McCarthy, "JSON is dangerous (and slow)," Personal Blog, Jan 23, 2024
. 
MongoDB, "JSON and BSON" (MongoDB Guides), MongoDB Inc.
. 
JSON streaming (Wikipedia article: Newline-delimited JSON), accessed 2025
.
(Additional sources cited inline)
RFC 8259 - The JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) Data
Interchange Format 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8259
JSON is dangerous (and slow) - Smári McCarthy
https://smarimccarthy.is/posts/2024-01-23-json-bad/
Trailing commas - JavaScript | MDN
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Trailing_commas
JSON And BSON | MongoDB | MongoDB
https://www.mongodb.com/resources/basics/json-and-bson
What is the COCO JSON Annotation Format?
https://roboflow.com/formats/coco-json
SOAP vs REST vs JSON - a 2023 comparison · Raygun Blog
https://raygun.com/blog/soap-vs-rest-vs-json/
How to Save and Load Your Keras Deep Learning Model - MachineLearningMastery.com
https://machinelearningmastery.com/save-load-keras-deep-learning-models/
RESTful API  |  TFX  |  TensorFlow
https://www.tensorflow.org/tfx/serving/api_rest
From PDFs to AI-ready structured data: a deep dive · Explosion
https://explosion.ai/blog/pdfs-nlp-structured-data
1
• 
1
2
3
10
30
• 
17
• 
16
• 
18
• 
19
• 
21
• 
31
32
• 
24
20
• 
15
• 
26
1
2
3
4
6
7
8
10
11
12
28
30
5
13
14
20
22
24
25
27
29
9
15
16
17
18
19
21
23
13

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 14
------------------------------------------------------------------------

JSON streaming - Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON_streaming
Structured vs Unstructured Data Explained with Examples
https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/structured-unstructured-data/
26
31
32
14
