Z-Wave Home Automation and the Jasco ZW4104
Smart Switch: A Developer’s Guide
Z-Wave Protocol Overview
What is Z-Wave? Z-Wave is a low-power wireless communication protocol designed specifically for smart
home and IoT devices. It operates in the sub-1GHz ISM band (e.g. ~908 MHz in North America, ~868 MHz in
Europe),  which  helps  minimize  Wi-Fi  interference  and  improve  range  through  walls
.  Z-Wave
networks are centralized around a primary controller (often a smart home hub) that manages the network
and acts as a gateway to other systems
. All other devices (sensors, switches, etc.) communicate with the
hub using Z-Wave, keeping your smart devices on their own dedicated network for reliability and security
. Each Z-Wave network has a unique 32-bit Home ID, and devices get a Node ID (8-bit) when
included, allowing up to 232 devices per network
. Inclusion (pairing) is the process of adding a device to
the network – the controller is put in Add Mode and the device’s pairing button is pressed to join, at which
point it receives its Node ID, network key (for security), and neighbor signal map for routing
. Devices
not originally part of the network must be excluded (removed/reset) before they can be included in a new
network.
Mesh Networking Model: Z-Wave employs a self-healing mesh network topology. Mains-powered devices
(like switches, plugs, etc.) act as signal repeaters that can forward messages for others, extending range
and providing redundant paths
. Battery-operated nodes typically do not repeat (to conserve power),
so only always-on devices form the mesh. During inclusion, a device measures signal strength to nearby
nodes and stores neighbors to build routing tables
. The controller calculates optimal routes so that
when it sends a command to a distant device, intermediate nodes will relay it. Up to four hops are allowed
for a message to reach its destination in standard Z-Wave networks
. This mesh allows communication
even without direct line-of-sight: if one path fails (device offline or out of range), messages can reroute via
alternate nodes, making the network resilient
. Z-Wave devices acknowledge every message (two-
way communication), so the sender knows if a command was received
. This ACK mechanism, combined
with mesh routing, greatly improves reliability of home automation commands.
Figure: Example of a Z-Wave mesh network. A central hub/controller communicates with devices through direct or
routed connections. Mains-powered nodes (like smart plugs and switches) act as repeaters to reach farther
devices,  while  battery  devices  (gray)  do  not  repeat
.  The  mesh  can  route  around  failures,  ensuring
messages find an alternate path if one node is unreachable.
Device Roles and Node Types: In a Z-Wave network, the primary controller (hub) is typically a static
controller that maintains the routing table and network information. Other devices are slaves (also called
end devices or nodes). Z-Wave Plus (5th gen) introduced specific role types: e.g. an “Always On Slave” is a
mains-powered node that is always listening and can route messages (repeat), whereas a “Sleeping Slave”
is a battery device that wakes up periodically (and cannot route)
. The Jasco ZW4104 smart switch, for
example, is an “On/Off Power Switch” device type and an Always On Slave (meaning it’s a listening node that
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
7
10
11
8
12
9
8
13
14
1

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

is always powered and participates in the mesh)
. Z-Wave Plus devices also broadcast info about their
role and device type via the Z-Wave Plus Info command class, making network setup more plug-and-play.
Device Classes: Every Z-Wave device is identified by Device Classes that declare its general and specific
type and thereby its capabilities. There are three tiers: a Basic device class (e.g. Controller, Routing Slave,
etc.), a Generic device class (broad category like Binary Switch, Multilevel Sensor, Thermostat, etc.), and a
Specific device class (more precise role within the generic category). For example, the ZW4104 is a Generic
Binary Switch (a device that can be turned on/off) with a Specific class of Power Switch (an on/off switch for
powering appliances). These classes inform controllers what kind of device it is and what command classes
it will support. They also ensure a level of interoperability – for instance, any Generic Binary Switch must
respond to basic On/Off commands. Device classes, along with a device’s  Command Class support, are
announced during the Z-Wave interview (discovery) process when inclusion happens
. This allows
the controller’s software to build a user-friendly representation (like showing it as a switch with on/off
controls, possibly with energy monitoring if a Meter command is supported, etc.).
Command Classes: Z-Wave defines a large collection of Command Classes (CC) – these are like functional
modules or interfaces that a device can implement to advertise and use certain features
. Each CC has an
identifier (e.g. Basic (0x20), Switch Binary (0x25), Meter (0x32), Configuration (0x70), etc.) and devices
support those relevant to their function. For example, a simple on/off outlet implements the Switch Binary
command class for on/off control, and usually also the Basic class for broad compatibility (the Basic CC is a
generic on/off/dim command that controllers often map to the primary function)
. The Jasco ZW4104
supports around 14 command classes, including Basic, Switch Binary, Association (for direct device links),
Configuration (for custom settings),  Manufacturer Specific (to report model/vendor info),  Version (to
report  firmware  version),  Device  Reset  Locally,  Firmware  Update  Meta-Data (for  OTA  updates),
Powerlevel (for RF signal test), Switch All (to respond to “all on/off” commands), and some older scene
control classes (Scene Activation/Actuator)
. Command classes define what commands can be sent or
received. For instance, the Switch Binary CC defines commands like  Switch Binary Set (On/Off),  Get, and
Report. A controller uses these to turn the plug on or off and to query its state. The Configuration CC allows
setting device-specific parameters (for example, auto-off timers or LED behavior). When a Z-Wave device is
included, the controller interviews it to ask “which command classes do you support?” and then queries
each supported CC for details. This is how the system knows, for example, that a smart plug supports being
toggled and possibly has parameters to adjust.
Z-Wave Security (S0 and S2): Security is a critical aspect of Z-Wave, especially for devices like door locks and
alarms. Older Z-Wave devices could join insecurely (plain-text commands) or using the original Security v1
(S0) scheme. S0 uses an AES-128 encryption with a shared network key, but its key exchange had known
weaknesses and it adds a lot of overhead (each encrypted command effectively triples the packets)
.
Newer devices (Z-Wave Plus v2, 2017 onward) use the Security S2 framework, which is more robust and
efficient. S2 uses an  Elliptic Curve Diffie–Hellman (ECDH) based key exchange to securely share keys
during inclusion, solving the vulnerabilities of S0’s handshake
. It defines three security classes (S2
Unauthenticated, S2 Authenticated, and S2 Access Control) which use different keys depending on device
type – for example, door locks use the high-security “Access Control” class and require a user-entered PIN or
QR code on the device (the DSK) to ensure the hub is talking to the real device
. All S2 and S0
communications still use AES-128 encryption for the payload, but S2’s handshake with ECDH (using modern
Curve25519) prevents eavesdropping or key compromise during inclusion
. In practice, when you
add a Z-Wave Plus device with S2, your controller will ask for a 5-digit code (from the DSK) or scan a QR code
on the device to verify its identity during secure inclusion. If a device and controller both support S2, they
14
15
16
15
16
17
18
19
20
20
21
22
23
24
2

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

will use it; if not, they may fall back to S0 or unsecured as needed for backward compatibility
. Secure
devices will communicate encrypted for all supported command classes (commands are encapsulated in a
Security layer). Note that security adds some latency and battery cost, so non-critical devices (like light
switches) can sometimes be included non-securely in older systems to improve performance. The Jasco
ZW4104 in particular is a Z-Wave Plus device but, being an older model (2015 era), it does not support S2
security (and apparently not even S0) according to its conformance statement
. Newer Z-Wave Plus
devices usually support S2 by default. As a developer or advanced user, it’s important to include devices with
the desired security level – for example, use S2 Authenticated whenever possible for sensitive devices since
it  significantly  improves  the  network’s  defense  against  hackers  (S2  also  has  improvements  like  the
Supervision CC to acknowledge commands and improve reliability).
Integrating Z-Wave Devices into Smart Home Systems
Controllers, Hubs and Gateways: To use Z-Wave devices like the ZW4104 plug-in switch, you need a Z-
Wave controller (often called a hub or gateway). This could be a dedicated hub (e.g. SmartThings, Hubitat,
Vera, Aeotec Z-Stick with software, etc.) or a USB Z-Wave adapter attached to a home server (for example, a
Z-Wave USB stick used with Home Assistant, OpenHAB, or HomeSeer software). The controller is the brain of
the Z-Wave network: it holds the network’s Home ID and knows all the included devices. It also typically
provides a bridge to your IP network – for instance, a SmartThings hub connects Z-Wave devices to the
SmartThings cloud and app; Home Assistant’s Z-Wave JS integration exposes Z-Wave devices as entities in
the Home Assistant system, and so on. From a developer perspective, many controllers offer APIs to
interact with devices: e.g. Home Assistant’s service calls ( switch.turn_on , etc.), SmartThings’ Groovy
(legacy) or Edge drivers, or OpenZWave’s MQTT API. All of these abstract the Z-Wave protocol into higher-
level commands. Under the hood, when you toggle a Z-Wave device via an app or automation, the hub
sends the appropriate Z-Wave command (like a Switch Binary Set command) to that node over the mesh
network.
Inclusion (Pairing) Process: Adding a Z-Wave device to your system is a standardized procedure. First, you
put the controller into inclusion mode (via the hub’s app or UI). Then you press the device’s include button
(on the ZW4104, the manual says to press and release the button once to include
). The device and
controller exchange information: the device receives the Home ID and a Node ID is assigned, and if joining
securely, keys are exchanged at this time. The controller will then interrogate (interview) the device’s
supported command classes. In a modern Z-Wave stack like Z-Wave JS (used by Home Assistant), you can
see this interview process in logs – it will query things like “Manufacturer Specific” (to get vendor and
product ID), “Version” (to get firmware version), etc., and then each functional CC like Switch Binary or Meter
to get initial values. After inclusion, the device is ready for use. It’s good practice to perform a network
heal/optimization after  adding  devices,  so  that  routing  tables  are  updated  (some  hubs  do  this
automatically). Exclusion is similarly initiated from the controller (remove mode) and then button press on
device – this resets the device’s network data so it can join a new network. The ZW4104 also supports a local
factory reset (unplug, hold button, plug in) if the controller is missing
. Inclusion should ideally be done
with the device near its final location, so that neighbors are learned correctly (Z-Wave Plus can use low-
power inclusion where the initial pairing is done at short range, then it updates neighbors after you place
it). In any case, remember to exclude a device before selling or repurposing it, so it’s free of the old network.
Hubs and Software Integration: Once included, the smart plug or other device will appear in your hub’s
interface. For example, in Home Assistant (with Z-Wave JS), the ZW4104 would show up as a device with a
switch  entity (for the controlled outlet). You could then control it via the UI or via Home Assistant service
25
26
27
28
29
3

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

calls ( switch.turn_on  or  .turn_off ). In a system like  SmartThings, the plug would pair and be
assigned a Device Handler (Edge driver) that understands its command classes – it might show up as a
generic  “Z-Wave  Switch”.  The  integration  layer  often  automatically  picks  up  features:  e.g.,  if  a  device
supported energy reports (Meter CC), Home Assistant’s Z-Wave integration would expose those as sensor
entities (e.g. watts, kWh). Since the ZW4104 doesn’t report power, it likely just shows the switch entity. Many
hubs also allow scene or automation creation via their apps or via code. For instance, using Z-Wave JS API
or OpenZWave, a developer could send a raw Z-Wave command if needed – but usually it’s not, as the hub
takes care of translating high-level actions into Z-Wave commands.
Scenes, Associations, and Automation: There are two ways to link behaviors in Z-Wave: through the hub’s
logic (scenes/rules) or through direct association between devices. Most modern smart home setups rely
on the hub’s automation engine: e.g. you create a rule “When motion is detected (sensor), turn on the ZW4104
plug (lamp)”. The hub subscribes to the sensor’s reports and then issues an on command to the plug. This
allows complex multi-device conditions, schedules, and integration with non-Z-Wave triggers (like time of
day or cloud services). On the other hand, Association is a built-in Z-Wave mechanism where devices can
directly  control  each  other  without  the  hub  in  the  loop once  configured.  Z-Wave  devices  maintain
association groups, each tied to certain events (like a button press or sensor trigger). When the event
occurs, the device automatically sends a Basic Set (or other relevant command) to all devices in that group
. For example, the Jasco ZW4104 has an association Group 1 for “Lifeline” (it sends status reports to the
controller)
. It also has Group 2 and 3; according to its conformance statement, one group (Group 2) is
used to send Basic Set to associated nodes when the local load is switched, and another (Group 3) sends
Basic Set when the button is double-pressed
. In practice, you could associate Group 2 of the plug with
another Z-Wave light so that manually pressing the plug’s button will also turn that light on/off. Association
is useful for creating hub-independent scenes (like a 3-way switch setup or all lights off with one button)
and for ensuring critical commands (like a motion sensor triggering a siren) don’t have to go through a
possibly busy or offline hub. However, associations need to be configured (usually via the hub’s interface or
a Z-Wave PC Controller software), and they have limitations (devices must be in the same network, and the
receiving devices must accept the command class sent – e.g., Basic on a dimmer will typically turn it on/off).
The ZW4104’s inclusion of old  Scene Activation command classes is noteworthy – older Z-Wave scene
controllers could trigger preconfigured scenes by sending a “Scene Activation” command with a scene ID,
and devices with Scene Actuator Configuration could recall preset levels for that scene. In modern systems,
this  is  largely  supplanted  by  hub-managed  scenes  or  the  newer  Central  Scene  CC  (for  multi-tap  on
switches), so the ZW4104’s scene CC support is mostly for backward compatibility. 
Case Study: Jasco ZW4104 Plug-in Smart Switch
Overview of the Device: The Jasco ZW4104 (marketed under GE or Jasco brand, also identified as model
28172) is a Z-Wave Plus plug-in appliance switch. It’s a small device that plugs into a standard wall outlet
and provides two sockets: one Z-Wave controlled outlet (for the load you want to automate) and one pass-
through outlet that is always on
. This allows you to still use the second outlet for an appliance or
lamp that you don’t need to control. The ZW4104 is rated for up to 15A total pass-through, with the
controlled outlet supporting up to 1800W (15A resistive) or ½ HP motor loads (it’s designed for lamps, fans,
small appliances – not for heavy-duty 240V or large motors)
. It does  not support dimming (it’s
strictly on/off, as it’s intended for non-dimmable loads like appliances or non-dimmable lamps)
. On the
front, there’s a manual pushbutton which toggles the controlled outlet on or off, and also serves as the
programming button for inclusion/exclusion and reset
. An LED indicator is usually built in to show
on/off status or network activity (many Jasco devices have a tiny LED that can often be configured – e.g.,
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
34
4

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

glow when off vs on, or disabled – via a Configuration parameter). The form-factor of the ZW4104 is a space-
efficient design that, when plugged into the top receptacle of a wall outlet, leaves the bottom receptacle
open (it doesn’t cover both sockets)
. The controlled outlet is typically on the side of the module (so that
plugs and cords stick out to the side), while the pass-through outlet is on the front face. This arrangement,
along with a low-profile depth, allows furniture to be placed close to it without bending cords sharply.
Figure: The Jasco Plug-in Smart Switch (ZW4104). It provides one Z-Wave controlled AC outlet (for lamps, fans, etc.)
and one always-on outlet in a compact form factor. The button on top is used for manual on/off control and for Z-
Wave inclusion/exclusion pairing
.
Z-Wave Plus Features: Being a Z-Wave Plus certified device, the ZW4104 supports extended range and
features  over  older  Z-Wave.  It  can  communicate  up  to  ~100-150  feet  line-of-sight
 (typical  indoor
effective range is less, depending on walls). It also supports beaming, a feature important for Z-Wave locks
– while the plug itself doesn’t use beaming, it can forward beamed messages to locks. The device advertises
Z-Wave Plus Info and supports the  “Lifeline” association group (Group 1) to report its status to the
controller
. Group 1 typically will include the hub’s Node ID by default after inclusion, and the ZW4104
will send it automatic notifications like “Switch Binary Report” when its state changes (e.g., if someone
presses the button to turn it off, it will immediately notify the hub). This instant status reporting is a big
advantage over older Z-Wave switches that sometimes required polling – the ZW4104 tells the controller of
changes in real-time via the Lifeline. The conformance statement on the Z-Wave Alliance site also shows
additional association Groups 2 and 3, each able to hold 5 nodes, which the device uses for control: Group 2
sends Basic Set commands when the local (single press) on/off happens, and Group 3 sends Basic Set when
a double-press of the button is detected
. In practice, Jasco’s newer devices (and this one) allow double-
tap as a sort of scene trigger. For instance, you could associate Group 3 to some other Z-Wave lights –
double-tapping the plug’s button could then turn those lights on (via Basic Set). This provides a simple
scene control without the hub, if set up.
Power Control and Commands: The primary function of the ZW4104 is to control power to whatever is
plugged into its Z-Wave outlet. This is handled through the  Switch Binary command class. To turn the
outlet on or off, the controller can send a Switch Binary Set  command (with value 0xFF for ON or 0x00
for OFF) to the device. The ZW4104 will then switch its internal relay accordingly, supplying or cutting power
to the outlet. It will also typically respond with a  Switch Binary Report  (or the hub may poll a
Switch Binary Get  to confirm). Because the device also supports the Basic command class (as most Z-
Wave devices do for interoperability), a Basic Set command will likewise turn it on/off (Basic is usually
mapped to the same behavior as the primary function – in this case, on/off control of the outlet)
.
The plug will also automatically send out a report when manually toggled; Z-Wave Plus mandates that state
changes are reported via the Lifeline association. So, if you walk up and press the button on the ZW4104, it
will flip the relay and send a notification to the hub (most likely a Basic Report or Switch Binary Report
indicating the new state). This way the controller’s UI stays in sync without needing to continuously poll the
device. Under the hood, the device’s firmware ties the physical button to both local control and to triggering
those  association  group  commands.  The  Switch  All command  class  support  means  the  ZW4104  can
respond to a broadcast “All On” or “All Off” command. Many Z-Wave remotes or controllers have a concept
of turning all lights off; because the plug is a  lighting device class, it will obey those commands (this
behavior can sometimes be configured or disabled via parameters, e.g., to ignore “all off” if desired). 
From a developer perspective, controlling the ZW4104 via a home automation system could be as simple as
calling a high-level function. For example, in Home Assistant one would call the service switch.turn_off
39
38
34
40
31
32
17
41
5

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

with the entity for this plug, which ultimately causes a Z-Wave frame to be sent. In a more raw environment,
you could use a library (like OZW or Z-Wave JS) to send a command: for instance, using zwave-js, something
like  node.commandClasses['Binary Switch'].set(true)  would turn it on. The Z-Wave protocol
handles delivery and retry if needed, and the plug will acknowledge with an ACK at the protocol level. If the
S2 security was in use (not in this device’s case), that command would be encrypted and the plug would
decrypt it internally before acting. 
Monitoring and Energy Reporting: Unlike some smart plugs, the Jasco ZW4104 does not have built-in
energy or power monitoring – it’s essentially an on/off switch only. Many GE/Jasco plug-in modules from
that  era  did  not support  the  Meter  command  class  for  energy  usage
.  They  were  simply  binary
controlled outlets. That said, the question of “monitoring” can refer to a few aspects: monitoring the on/off
state (which the ZW4104 does via status reports), and monitoring the power consumption of the connected
load (which this unit doesn’t do). For completeness, let’s discuss how a Z-Wave device would report energy
usage if it had that feature. A smart plug that supports energy monitoring (e.g. Aeotec Smart Switch 6, Zooz
plugs, or some newer Enbrighten models) implements the Meter Command Class (0x32). Through this, the
device can report parameters like current Wattage (power draw) and accumulated kilowatt-hours (energy
usage over time), and sometimes voltage or amperage depending on the meter type. The device might
periodically send a Meter Report  on its own (either at fixed intervals or when the consumption changes
by a certain percentage) and can also respond to a Meter Get  query from the controller. Typically, there
are configuration parameters that govern auto-reporting – for example, report wattage every X minutes or
report if power changes by Y%. These help balance network traffic with timeliness of updates. If the ZW4104
had this capability, you would expect to see the Meter CC listed in its command classes, and the manual
would mention the ability to display energy usage. Since it’s not present, the ZW4104’s “monitoring” is
limited to knowing whether it’s on or off (and of course the controller can infer that if it’s off, the load is
drawing zero power except negligible standby of the plug itself). Some use cases (discussed later) rely on
energy reporting – for instance, detecting when a washing machine finishes by the drop in wattage – but
you would need a different plug that supports it to achieve that. Still, for  power control (on/off), the
ZW4104 performs reliably and can be used to indirectly monitor device usage (e.g., if a lamp is off, you know
its energy usage is zero and when it’s on, you know it’s using whatever the lamp consumes). 
To summarize the ZW4104’s capabilities: it accepts Z-Wave commands to switch a load on/off, it can be part
of automated scenes, and it will keep the controller updated of its on/off status. It doesn’t measure volts/
amps/watts, so any “energy monitoring” in the system would be at a coarse level (on vs off time tracking). If
energy monitoring is required, one might pair this discussion with a similar Z-Wave plug that has metering
(for example, the newer Jasco/Enbrighten 14294 or a Zooz ZEN plug), which would use the Meter CC to
report, “e.g. 120 Watts being drawn now” to the hub, which could then be used in automations. 
Advanced Configuration: The ZW4104, like many Jasco devices, likely offers some configurable parameters
accessible via the Configuration CC. The product documentation hints at “advanced features that allow you
to customize your experience” adjustable via a Z-Wave controller with Configuration command class
. Common adjustable parameters for smart plugs include things like the LED indicator behavior (e.g.,
parameter to turn the LED off completely, or lit when load is on vs off), or an auto-off timer (for instance,
turn off automatically after a set period). While the exact parameter list for this model isn’t given in the
basic manuals, Jasco often publishes the configuration parameters on their support site. For example, other
Jasco switches have a parameter for “night light” mode (LED). If using software like Home Assistant’s Z-Wave
JS or OpenZWave control panel, you would see these parameters and could set them. As a developer, if you
needed  to  change  a  configuration  value  via  code,  you  might  use  something  like  a
42
43
44
6

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

zwave_js.set_config_parameter  service call (in Home Assistant) or an OZW command to send a
Configuration Set to the node with the parameter number and desired value. These configurations are
stored in the device’s non-volatile memory. There’s also support for firmware updates via the  Firmware
Update Meta-Data CC, meaning the device can receive OTA firmware updates from the controller if Jasco
provides any (this is rarely used by end-users unless a specific bug fix firmware is needed and available). 
Practical Implementation Strategies and Best Practices
Automation via Scenes and Rules
One of the strengths of integrating Z-Wave devices like the ZW4104 into a smart home is the ability to
create automations that tie multiple devices and triggers together. Here are a few practical strategies: 
Time-based Schedules: Using your hub’s scheduling, you can have the ZW4104-controlled outlet
turn on or off at certain times. For example, turn on a lamp plugged into the ZW4104 at sunset and
turn it off at 11 PM. This can be configured in a hub’s app or via an automation script. If writing YAML
for Home Assistant, it might look like: 
automation:
- alias: "Porch Lamp on at Sunset"
trigger:
platform: sun
event: sunset
action:
service: switch.turn_on
target:
entity_id: switch.porch_lamp_plug
# assuming the ZW4104 is named 
porch_lamp_plug
- alias: "Porch Lamp off at 23:00"
trigger:
platform: time
at: "23:00"
action:
service: switch.turn_off
target:
entity_id: switch.porch_lamp_plug
This is a simple example, but it shows how the high-level automation translates into the Z-Wave device
being commanded on/off on schedule.
Event-based Triggers: Use sensor inputs or other events. For instance, plug a fan or space heater
into the ZW4104 and use a temperature sensor’s reading to control it (if room temp > 25°C, turn off
the heater’s plug). Or integrate with motion sensors: e.g., if motion in living room and it’s evening, turn
on the lamp (ZW4104). Z-Wave devices can work seamlessly in such rules alongside Zigbee, Wi-Fi, etc.,
since the hub abstracts the protocol differences.
• 
• 
7

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Scenes  and  Group  Actions: Set  up  a  bedtime  scene  that  turns  off  all  downstairs  lights  and
appliances: the ZW4104 can be part of that scene (the hub will send it an off command along with
commands to other devices). Some hubs let you create a “Scene” that you can trigger with one
command or button. If using association for a group action (not involving the hub), you might, for
example, associate several Z-Wave plugs or modules to a controller button so they all respond
together. But often, simply creating a hub automation to send off commands to multiple Node IDs
achieves a similar outcome (with the hub doing a multicast or sequential sends). Z-Wave does
support a multicast for basic commands to multiple nodes at once (e.g., turn off 5 nodes with one
radio message), but not all controllers expose that. In any case, for a small network, sending a few
commands in a row is fine (they queue up). 
Direct Association Use Case: Suppose you have a Z-Wave wall switch that doesn’t actually control a
load (like a battery-powered remote or a scene controller button). You could associate that directly
with the ZW4104 plug so that pressing the button toggles the plug without waiting for the central
hub. This is useful for creating a virtual 3-way switch – for example, a plug controlling a corner lamp
can be linked to a wall transmitter. The association is nearly instantaneous and will still work even if
your primary controller is offline (since the devices talk directly). To set this up, you’d use your
controller’s interface to add the ZW4104’s Node ID to the remote’s Group 1 (or appropriate group).
Once set, the remote’s Basic Set commands will be routed to the plug. Keep in mind the association
range is limited to direct radio range (or via mesh if it’s a multi-hop association message). 
Fail-safe automations: If using the plug for something critical (like a pump), you might create rules
for safety – e.g., if a leak sensor triggers, turn off the plug powering a water pump, etc. This
highlights how multiple Z-Wave components can work together for home safety.
Polling and Network Performance Considerations
In  a  well-configured  Z-Wave  network,  polling should  be  minimized.  Polling  is  when  the  controller
periodically requests the state or sensor reading from a device. This generates extra traffic that can lead to
delays if overused. Thankfully, Z-Wave Plus devices like the ZW4104 report their state changes proactively
(via the lifeline), so there’s usually no need to poll them for on/off status. Older devices (pre-Plus era)
sometimes didn’t do instant reporting due to patent restrictions; those had to be polled to detect manual
state changes. If you do have to poll (for example, you want to regularly get a reading from a power meter
plug or an older sensor), it’s best to set a reasonable interval (like 30 seconds to a few minutes, depending
on needs). Avoid polling battery devices frequently, as it will wake them up and drain battery life – battery-
powered sensors typically send their data on their own schedule or when triggered, and they also send a
periodic wake-up notification for the controller to poll any queued requests (configured via the Wakeup CC).
Polling a sleeping device is ineffective because it won’t respond until awake.
For the ZW4104, you might only consider polling if you were unsure of its state due to some missed report
(which is rare) or if you wanted to enforce an auto-off by polling (a crude method). But since it has an
internal relay, its state should be very reliable – either the hub got the ack or not. If the hub missed an
update (maybe due to interference at that moment), a periodic poll (say every hour) could correct the UI
state, but this is generally handled by retries and supervision commands automatically in modern Z-Wave
stacks. So best practice: enable polling only if necessary, and only as frequently as needed.
• 
• 
• 
8

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Excessive polling or too many frequent status reports can congest the Z-Wave network. Z-Wave is not a
high-bandwidth protocol; it transmits at 9.6 kbps, 40 kbps, or 100 kbps depending on the region and device
generation (most Z-Wave Plus are 100 kbps in ideal conditions, but can fall back). Because each message
also requires an ACK, the effective throughput is limited. If you had dozens of energy-monitoring plugs all
reporting every few seconds, plus lots of sensors, you could start queuing messages and increasing latency.
It’s wise to configure reporting thresholds on power plugs (e.g., only report when change > 5%) and not to
report too often unless needed. Many hubs set sane defaults (like once every 60 seconds for power, which is
fine for most uses).
Dealing with Latency and Reliability
Latency in Z-Wave communication is generally low – on the order of tens of milliseconds per hop – so a
direct command might happen in <100 ms, and even a few hops might be ~200 ms. In a normal home
network, turning on a light via Z-Wave feels almost instant (well under a second). However, if you notice
delays of several seconds, it indicates some network issues or heavy traffic. Here are some strategies to
ensure low latency and reliability:
Strong Mesh and Placement: Make sure you have enough mains-powered devices to form a solid
mesh network across your home. Z-Wave’s range is good, but every wall and floor attenuates the
signal. If your hub is in the basement and a plug is two floors up on the opposite side, ensure there
are intermediate powered nodes (like switches or plugs in between) that can relay. Z-Wave allows up
to 4 hops by default, but fewer is better for speed. Place the hub centrally if possible. The ZW4104
itself can act as a repeater for other devices, so having one in distant corners can actually improve
connectivity for nearby sensors.
Remove Dead Nodes: If a device is unplugged or failed and the controller still thinks it’s in the
network,  other  nodes  might  try  routing  through  it  and  experience  timeouts.  It’s  important  to
cleanup any dead nodes from the controller’s routing tables
. Most controllers will do a periodic
heal; during heal, they mark unresponsive nodes as failed and reroute. You can manually exclude or
delete devices that are no longer present. This prevents delays caused by repeatedly trying to reach
a missing node.
Association misuse: Only use associations where appropriate. A misconfigured association could
cause a flood (for example, two devices associated to each other both sending Basic Sets to each
other could create a loop – though Z-Wave command classes usually are designed to avoid loops, it’s
possible in weird configurations). Also, as a tip from the Z-Wave manual:  “Remove all dead devices
from associations. Otherwise you will see severe delays.”
 – this is because if an associated node is
dead, the device might try to send commands to it (at the protocol level it will attempt a few times)
causing a delay in finishing the group broadcast.
Use Scenes or Multicast for simultaneous actions: If you have an automation that turns on 10 Z-
Wave devices at once, sending 10 separate commands sequentially can take a couple of seconds.
Some controllers can use a multicast frame to send a Basic Set to multiple nodes in one go (which is
more efficient). If your hub supports it, prefer that approach. If not, consider staggering non-critical
commands by a few hundred milliseconds if you truly have many at once. But generally, up to a
handful can be handled quickly – Z-Wave can queue and handle about 100 packets per second
• 
• 
45
• 
45
• 
9

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

theoretically at 40kbps, though in real deployments, keeping below ~20 commands per second is
wise for stability.
Check for interference: Because Z-Wave is sub-GHz, it usually doesn’t conflict with Wi-Fi, but
cordless phones or other ISM devices (like some older baby monitors at 900 MHz) could interfere.
Also,  metal  enclosures  or  concrete  can  severely  cut  down  range.  If  you  encounter  latency  or
unreliability to a particular device like the ZW4104, check if relocating the hub or adding a repeater
between them helps. Also ensure the device’s antenna (usually internal) isn’t pressed against metal
objects.
Supervision  and  Retries: Z-Wave  Plus  introduced  the  Supervision  Command  Class,  which
essentially wraps a command and requires a direct acknowledge from the device’s application layer
(not just the low-level ACK). This helps detect if a command was received and acted on. Hubs like Z-
Wave JS use this for S2 devices. If a device doesn’t respond, the controller will retry the command a
couple times. This usually happens behind the scenes. But if you see logs with multiple retries or
Supervision CC failing, it indicates communication trouble. Address this by improving the signal
(move devices, reduce load, etc.). The goal is that each command gets an ACK on first try, which
should be the case in a healthy network.
In practice, many users have dozens of Z-Wave devices and get sub-second performance routinely. If you
were controlling, say, 50 plugs at once (imagine a holiday event turning off every light in a mansion), you
might hit some limits – but normal home automation remains well within Z-Wave’s capacity. The ZW4104,
being a non-battery device, will always immediately repeat messages and respond quickly, which helps
maintain overall mesh responsiveness. If you notice a specific delay, tools like Zniffer (Z-Wave sniffer) or the
hub’s own statistics can pinpoint if there are a lot of route retries or failed frames, and then you can take
corrective measures (like adding a repeater or moving a noisy device). 
Use Cases and Examples
To ground all this theory, here are a few real-world use cases for a Z-Wave smart plug like the ZW4104 and
how you’d implement them:
Lamp Control and Smart Lighting: The classic use: plug a lamp into the ZW4104. Now you can turn
that  lamp  on/off  via  app,  voice  (if  integrated  with  Alexa/Google  Home  through  the  hub),  or
automation. For instance, create a rule “When the front door Z-Wave motion sensor detects motion after
sunset, turn on the entryway lamp (ZW4104) for 5 minutes.” This uses a Z-Wave motion sensor’s trigger,
possibly some time condition, and the plug’s on/off control. It makes your plug part of a larger smart
lighting system. You might also tie it into scenes like “Movie Time” to turn off all lights (the lamp goes
off along with smart bulbs etc.). With a hub like SmartThings or Home Assistant, you can do this
entirely through their automation engines, and the Z-Wave commands are handled behind the
scenes. The benefit of Z-Wave here is that everything is local (no cloud needed for execution), so it
remains fast and works during internet outages
.
Appliance Scheduling and Energy Saving: Suppose you have a coffee maker that doesn’t have a
built-in timer. You could plug it into the ZW4104 and schedule it to turn on every weekday at 6:30am,
so your coffee brews automatically. Or use it with a portable electric heater in a home office – turn it
on 30 minutes before you wake up, and off when you leave. Another scenario: use the plug to cut
• 
• 
• 
46
• 
10

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 11
------------------------------------------------------------------------

power to “vampire” devices at night – e.g., entertainment center equipment that draws standby
power. An automation like “At midnight, turn off the TV’s smart plug” can save energy, and “at 6pm, turn
it back on” ensures everything is ready for use. Even though the ZW4104 doesn’t measure energy,
you know roughly those devices aren’t drawing power when the plug is off. For safety-critical
appliances like an iron or space heater, you could add a rule: if the plug has been on for more than 2
hours, turn it off (to avoid forgetting it on). Many hubs can do this by tracking the state duration of
the switch.
Power Monitoring Alerts: If you did use a Z-Wave plug with energy metering (not ZW4104, but let’s
say an Aeotec plug on your washing machine), you can create powerful automations: Notify me when
the washing machine cycle is done (i.e., power drops below 5 W for over 2 minutes). In code, this might
use a numeric state trigger on the power sensor provided by the plug. While ZW4104 can’t do this,
it could still be used in a similar fashion for simpler binary detection – e.g., if TV plug turns off (which
maybe you do manually via remote cut power?), then turn off some related device – but that’s less
common. Typically, metering plugs are better for these alerts. Still, controlling power draw indirectly
is possible: e.g., to prevent a space heater from running too long, you might not measure its watts,
but you can use a temperature sensor or simply a timed cut-off as mentioned.
Smart Home Integration Example (Home Assistant & Z-Wave JS): In Home Assistant, once the
ZW4104 is included via Z-Wave JS, you’d see something like: switch.ge_28172_switch  entity. You
could rename it. You also might see a sensor.ge_28172_alarm_level  or similar (Jasco devices
sometimes use the Alarm CC to report certain things like overload or button presses, but in this case,
probably not much since it’s just a switch). You could then do an automation such as: 
- alias: "Turn off heater if window open"
description: "If the window is open, cut power to the space heater plug
to save energy."
trigger:
- platform: state
entity_id: binary_sensor.window_contact
# a Z-Wave contact sensor
to: "on"
# assuming "on" means open
condition:
- condition: state
entity_id: switch.space_heater_plug
# the ZW4104 on the heater
state: "on"
action:
- service: switch.turn_off
target:
entity_id: switch.space_heater_plug
- service: notify.phone
data:
message: "Heater plug was turned off because the window was
opened."
• 
• 
11

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 12
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This automation shows integration between a Z-Wave contact sensor and the Z-Wave plug, with a
notification. It demonstrates a practical way to both conserve energy and ensure safety (no running
heater when a window is open).
Latency Example with Scene Controller: Let’s say you have a Z-Wave scene controller (e.g., a wall-
mounted  4-button  pad).  You  configure  one  button  to  toggle  the  ZW4104  via  the  hub’s  scene
automation. When you press the button, it sends a Central Scene command to the hub, the hub
processes the automation and sends a Switch Binary Set to the plug. The round-trip is usually a few
hundred milliseconds – pretty quick, but maybe you notice a slight delay. If you instead associated
that button directly to the plug, the button’s node would send Basic Set to the plug immediately on
press, possibly cutting a bit of the latency (and working even if hub is down). The trade-off is
flexibility (direct associations are fixed behavior, whereas hub logic can be more conditional). In
critical applications where speed is needed (like a panic button to siren), Z-Wave can achieve sub-
second performance reliably, but it’s always good to test. If the mesh is overloaded, you might see a
1-2 second delay, which is a sign to optimize the network.
Extending to other systems: The ZW4104’s usage isn’t limited to just one ecosystem. For example,
you might integrate your Z-Wave hub with a voice assistant:  “Alexa, turn on the living room lamp”
would  trigger  the  hub  to  issue  the  Z-Wave  command  to  the  plug.  Or  integrate  with  energy
management: if you had a whole-home energy monitor, you could automate “When solar generation
is high, turn on a dehumidifier plugged into ZW4104”, thereby using excess solar power productively. Z-
Wave’s interoperability (any certified device works with any certified controller) means you can mix
and  match  devices  from  various  brands  to  achieve  these  use  cases,  leveraging  the  common
command classes and the central intelligence of your hub
.
Conclusion
Z-Wave  remains  a  robust  and  developer-friendly  protocol  for  home  automation,  offering  a  mesh-
networked, reliable, and secure way to control devices like the Jasco ZW4104 smart switch. In this paper, we
explored the theoretical foundations of Z-Wave – from its mesh networking capabilities that allow up to 232
devices to communicate over several hops
, to its security framework that keeps your devices safe
through  AES  encryption  and  modern  key  exchanges
.  We  also  dove  into  the  practical  aspects  of
integrating and using a Z-Wave smart plug in real home scenarios. The Jasco ZW4104 served as an
illuminating case study: it exemplifies a typical Z-Wave Plus appliance module with on/off control, internal
relay, and seamless hub integration. We learned that while it doesn’t provide energy metering, it handles
the core job of power switching with high reliability and immediate status feedback to the controller (thanks
to  Z-Wave’s  built-in  confirmation  and  association  system)
.  For  developers  and  power  users,
understanding command classes and device classes is key to unlocking advanced functionality – whether it’s
tweaking a configuration parameter or setting up direct associations for instant scene control. On the
implementation side, we discussed strategies to ensure a responsive network: limit unnecessary polling,
maintain a strong mesh by placing repeater devices strategically, and leverage the hub’s automation engine
to orchestrate complex behaviors. By following best practices (like removing dead nodes to avoid delays
and using the latest security modes), a Z-Wave network can be both fast and secure. 
In a world where multiple smart home protocols coexist, Z-Wave’s niche is its proven reliability for local
control  and  its  rich  interoperability  (over  years,  it  has  built  a  library  of  command  classes  that  cover
everything from simple switches to thermostats and alarms). The ZW4104 smart switch, while a humble
• 
• 
47
6
11
20
9
45
12

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 13
------------------------------------------------------------------------

device, demonstrates how Z-Wave devices participate in a larger ecosystem: it can turn a basic lamp into a
remotely controlled light, integrate with sensors for automated decisions, and even contribute to energy
saving  strategies.  From  a  developer’s  perspective,  working  with  Z-Wave  involves  understanding  the
abstraction (the hub’s API or Z-Wave library) and sometimes digging into device-specific features (like
configuration parameters or associations). With the concepts and examples provided, one can confidently
deploy Z-Wave devices like the ZW4104 in a home automation project, knowing not just how to use it, but
why it behaves the way it does on the network. The theoretical knowledge of mesh networking and
command classes combined with the practical know-how of inclusion and automation forms a complete
picture – enabling you to design a smart home that is both robust and responsive. In summary, Z-Wave
continues to be a backbone of home automation, and devices such as the Jasco ZW4104 smart switch are
great building blocks, offering reliable power control that can be tailored through both software and
hardware features to create a truly intelligent home environment. 
Sources: The information in this report was gathered from Z-Wave protocol specifications and whitepapers,
product manuals and official conformance statements for the Jasco ZW4104
, as well as practical
insights from smart home communities and documentation
. These references provide further detail
on Z-Wave’s mesh network design, security classes, and the capabilities of Z-Wave smart switches. 
A Comprehensive Guide to Z-Wave
https://linkdhome.com/articles/What-is-z-wave
manual.zwave.eu
https://manual.zwave.eu/backend/make.php?lang=en&sku=28172%20(ZW4104)&cert=ZC10-15030009
GE 28172 - Z-Wave Plug-In Smart Switch - Alarm Grid
https://www.alarmgrid.com/products/ge-28172
products.z-wavealliance.org
https://products.z-wavealliance.org/products/2973/pics
Z-Way Manual — Command Class Reference
https://z-wave.me/manual/z-way/Command_Class_Reference.html
The ultimate guide to z-wave USB sticks - Z-WaveGuide
https://zwaveguide.com/the-ultimate-guide-to-z-wave-usb-sticks/
Z-Wave Security Whitepaper 
https://www.silabs.com/documents/public/white-papers/INS13474-Z-Wave-Security-Whitepaper.pdf
products.z-wavealliance.org
https://products.z-wavealliance.org/ProductManual/File?folder=&filename=Manuals/1270/28172%20QSG-UL.pdf
Z-ZW4104 - Jasco Wireless Z-Wave Plus Plug-In Dual Outlet Smart Switch
https://www.geoarm.com/z-zw4104-jasco-z-wave-appliance-module.html?
srsltid=AfmBOorDQ4eoQIx4tNxfAr1MKaa5GpCQT9vXFBOL4rUOPrv2csdsXL3M
Energy Monitoring in Jasco - Connected Things - SmartThings Community
https://community.smartthings.com/t/energy-monitoring-in-jasco/1679
14
18
42
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
12
13
21
46
9
25
27
28
29
30
45
47
11
36
37
14
18
26
32
15
16
17
41
19
20
22
23
24
31
33
34
38
39
44
35
40
43
42
13
