Building an Expandable, Modular Cloud OS with
Docker and Kubernetes
Introduction
Creating an expandable and modular cloud OS means designing a computing environment that isn’t tied
to a single machine, but can span multiple devices, scale with additional hardware, and run various services
in a flexible, isolated way. In this paper, we outline how to build such a system using two Apple computers
as a starting point: a 2019 MacBook Pro (Core i9, 32 GB RAM, 1 TB SSD) running the latest macOS, and a
2017 iMac 5K (48 GB RAM, 1 TB Fusion Drive) running macOS Ventura. The goal is to leverage these powerful
machines to run a unified Debian “Trixie” Linux environment (for our custom AI/OS) on top of the existing
OS, complete with a full  MATE desktop GUI accessible remotely. We will use  Docker containers for
modularity and Kubernetes (specifically a lightweight distribution) for orchestration, enabling the system
to easily expand as more hardware (such as a Supermicro X9QRi-F+ server planned as a storage/backup
node)  is  added.  All  components  will  be  interconnected  via  a  high-speed  Ethernet  network  (using  a
Thunderbolt-to-Ethernet adapter for the MacBook) to ensure reliable and fast communication between
nodes.
This design offers a number of benefits. First, it provides a consistent “cloud desktop” experience: you can
access the same Debian-based desktop and tools from any of your devices, without being limited by the
host OS
. Second, containerization ensures that each service or component of the OS is isolated and
portable, making the system highly modular. Third, Kubernetes allows these containerized components to
be distributed across machines and scaled, truly leveraging the combined CPU power (multiple cores of the
i9 and i7 CPUs), large memory (32 GB + 48 GB), and storage of both machines. Overall, this approach
merges the convenience of a personal OS with the robustness of cloud infrastructure, tailored to your
hardware. Below, we detail the architecture and steps to implement this expandable cloud OS.
Hardware and Network Setup
Hardware Overview: Our initial cluster will consist of two Apple machines: the 2019 MacBook Pro (6-core/
8-core Intel Core i9 with 32 GB RAM and 1 TB SSD) and the 2017 iMac 5K (quad-core Intel CPU with 48 GB
RAM and a 1 TB Fusion Drive). These machines provide a strong foundation – the MacBook Pro offers a
high-performance CPU and fast SSD, while the iMac contributes a large amount of RAM and additional
storage. Both will remain on macOS as the host OS for now, which means we won’t directly install Debian on
the bare metal but run it on top of macOS (via virtualization or containers). Keeping macOS intact ensures
you can still use the native OS, but our cloud OS environment will largely run within Debian instances.
Networking Configuration: To connect the machines in a cluster, we will use a wired Gigabit Ethernet
network. A direct Ethernet connection (or through a Gigabit switch/router) offers low latency and high
bandwidth, important for fast data exchange in the cluster. The MacBook Pro lacks a built-in Ethernet port,
so we’ll use a Thunderbolt or USB-C to Ethernet adapter to give it a reliable network interface. Once
connected, both machines should be on the same LAN segment and can be assigned static IP addresses (or
1
1

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

reserved  DHCP  leases)  to  simplify  cluster  setup.  This  direct  Ethernet  link  ensures  that  inter-node
communication  (such  as  Kubernetes  control  signals  or  data  transfers  between  Docker  containers  on
different hosts) occurs with minimal delay and maximum throughput. It’s advisable to verify connectivity
(e.g., by pinging between the MacBook and iMac) and to configure any necessary firewall settings on
macOS to allow the cluster traffic.
Future Expansion: The hardware setup is designed to be expandable. In the near future, you plan to add a
Supermicro X9QRi-F+ server to the mix, which will act as a storage and backup hub. That Supermicro is a
robust server-class machine (a quad-socket Xeon system) with potential for massive storage (it supports
many drives and up to 1 TB of RAM)
. When it comes online, it can either join the existing cluster as
another  node  or  operate  as  a  dedicated  storage  server  accessible  to  the  cluster.  We’ll  ensure  our
architecture can integrate this additional hardware seamlessly – for example, by using network storage
protocols or Kubernetes storage classes to make the Supermicro’s disks available to the cloud OS. The
single-cluster approach will be used initially (both the MacBook and iMac forming one Kubernetes cluster),
but this approach won’t preclude running multiple clusters later if needed (e.g., one for core services and
one for experiments, or an on-premises cluster and a cloud cluster, etc.). The key is that the design remains
flexible:  new  nodes  can  be  added  to  the  cluster  with  minimal  reconfiguration,  and  services  can  be
redistributed to take advantage of new resources.
Base OS: Debian Trixie with MATE Desktop Environment
At the heart of our cloud OS is Debian “Trixie”, the codename for Debian 13 (the latest release of Debian as
of 2025). We choose Debian for its renowned stability, large software repositories, and strong community
support.  Trixie,  in  particular,  comes  with  updated  packages  and  support  for  modern  hardware  and
architectures
. It also offers multiple desktop environment options – we will use MATE 1.26
 as our
desktop environment. MATE is a continuation of the classic GNOME 2 interface; it is lightweight, efficient,
and well-supported in Debian, making it ideal for a virtual/remote desktop scenario. By using MATE, we
ensure the GUI is not too resource-intensive, leaving more CPU and RAM headroom for other services and
containers.
Running Debian on Mac Hardware: Since our Macs are running macOS, we won’t replace their OS but
instead run Debian Trixie in a contained manner. There are two main approaches here: virtualization or
containerization. For a full desktop OS experience, the straightforward method is to use virtualization – for
example, installing a hypervisor like VirtualBox, VMware Fusion, Parallels, or the open-source UTM (QEMU)
on macOS, and then creating a Debian Trixie virtual machine. This VM will have the MATE desktop installed
and act as one node of our cloud OS. Each physical machine can run its own Debian VM: one on the
MacBook Pro and one on the iMac. We’ll allocate a reasonable amount of resources to each VM (e.g. 4–8
CPU cores and 16 GB RAM for the Debian VM on the MacBook, and perhaps 8 cores and 32 GB RAM for the
VM on the iMac, given its higher RAM, adjusting as needed). This leaves some resources for macOS, but the
majority can be devoted to the guest Debian system. By using hardware virtualization, we create an isolated
environment where Debian has full control of its kernel and modules, which is useful for running Docker
and Kubernetes inside it.
It’s  also  possible  to  use  containers to  run  Debian  userland  on  macOS  (since  Docker  can  run  Linux
containers on Mac by using a lightweight VM under the hood). However, running a full desktop environment
purely in Docker on macOS is more complex – it would involve containerizing the X11 server and desktop,
and is generally less straightforward than using a VM. Therefore, we will primarily use VMs for anything
2
3
4
5
2

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

requiring a GUI (the “virtual desktop”). In summary, each Mac will host a Debian Trixie instance (preferably
via VMs for full OS functionality). The combination of macOS + VM means our environment uses  both
hardware virtualization and containerization in tandem – a technique that provides maximum portability
and  flexibility
.  In  our  case,  macOS  provides  the  base  system,  the  VM  provides  a  Linux  kernel
environment, and within that we will deploy containers. This layered approach (containers inside VMs) is a
common design to get the benefits of both technologies
.
Setting up Debian + MATE: Once the virtualization is prepared, installing Debian Trixie is straightforward
using the standard ISO installer. We will include the MATE desktop packages (Debian’s installer or tasksel
can install “Debian desktop environment – MATE”). After installation, it’s important to configure the VM for
virtual desktop access. Since these Debian VMs might run headless (especially if the Mac is not actively
showing the VM), we want to be able to access the MATE desktop remotely from any device. We have a few
options:
X2Go: X2Go is a remote desktop solution that uses NX technology over SSH. It’s highly efficient and
works well even over low bandwidth, offering a responsive GUI experience
. X2Go pairs perfectly
with  MATE  (and  XFCE/LXDE)  –  in  fact,  it’s  known  to  work  fine  with  MATE  out-of-the-box  (with
compositing disabled for performance)
. We can install an X2Go server on the Debian VM and an
X2Go client on whichever system we use to access it (e.g. the MacBook’s macOS, or any other PC).
This will allow us to launch our cloud desktop and use it interactively, as if we were sitting at a
Debian machine, from anywhere. The advantage of X2Go is that it’s secure (using SSH) and can
resume sessions, so you could start a session from the iMac and later reconnect from the MacBook,
continuing where you left off – giving you a consistent work environment across multiple devices
.
VNC or RDP: Alternatively, we could configure a VNC server or use RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol
via xrdp). These solutions also allow remote GUI access. VNC is simpler but can be slower and less
secure; RDP (with xrdp on Linux) can integrate with Windows/Mac RDP clients. However, X2Go
generally outperforms VNC in speed and simplicity (and it supports sound and printing if needed).
For our purpose, we’ll likely stick with X2Go for the “cloud OS desktop.”
Direct Display: If you prefer, you could also use the VM’s console directly on the host machine
(VirtualBox GUI, etc.) for local access. For instance, the iMac could display the Debian VM on part of
its screen. But for the MacBook (which may not always be running the VM visibly) and to allow
remote access, X2Go/SSH is preferred.
Once this is set up, we will have Debian Trixie running with a full MATE desktop environment on both
machines. This environment constitutes the AI/OS base – you can install any Linux software here, use the
terminal, run development tools, etc. The “AI/OS” might include special AI software or agents (for example,
an AI assistant, machine learning libraries, etc.) – those can be installed in this environment or run as
containers as we’ll discuss. Crucially, by having this as a cloud-based desktop, it remains “always on” and
accessible. Even if your MacBook is turned off or taken outside, the iMac’s instance could still be running at
home, accessible via the internet if configured (using SSH port forwarding or VPN for security). This
addresses  the  use-case  of  an  “always-online,  remotely-accessible” system
.  Essentially,  your  Debian
desktop is not tied to one physical screen; it lives in the cluster and you view it from anywhere.
6
7
• 
8
9
1
• 
• 
10
3

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Docker for Modular Components and Services
With the base Debian OS running, the next step is to break down the OS’s capabilities into  modular
components using Docker containers. Docker will allow us to package various services or applications of
the OS into independent units (containers) that can be deployed and managed more easily than installing
everything directly on the OS. This modular design is a key to making the system flexible and expandable. 
Why  Docker? Docker  provides  operating-system-level  virtualization,  which  is  more  lightweight  than
running multiple full VMs. Containers share the host’s kernel but isolate the application processes and their
dependencies in separate environments. This means we can run many containers on one VM very efficiently
– Docker containers are generally faster and less resource-intensive than full virtual machines
. By
using containers, we leverage the hardware to the fullest: instead of one giant monolithic system, we can
have dozens of micro-services running, each taking only the resources it needs and with minimal overhead.
Modularity through Microservices: We plan to identify the different “features” or services of our AI/OS
and encapsulate them in containers. For example, some possible components might be: - AI services: If the
OS has AI capabilities (say a chatbot, voice assistant, or machine learning model serving), we can run those
in containers. For instance, an LLM-based assistant could run as a service listening on an API, packaged in a
Docker image with all its ML frameworks installed. This container can be updated or replaced independently
of the rest of the system. - Data storage and databases: If you need a database (for logging, for the AI’s
knowledge base, etc.), running it in a container (e.g., a PostgreSQL or MongoDB container) isolates the
database and makes it easy to manage its life cycle. The database container can use a persistent volume
(possibly on the iMac’s disk or the future Supermicro storage) for data durability. - Web interface or APIs:
Perhaps the AI/OS exposes a web dashboard or mobile UI. That web server can run in its own container
(e.g., an Nginx or Node.js container). - Background jobs or automations: Any scheduled tasks, file syncing
services, or background workers can each be a container. - Desktop environment integration: The GUI
apps that you run in the MATE desktop could either be installed traditionally or delivered via containers
using technologies like Docker AppImage or X11 forwarding from containers. For simplicity, core desktop
apps (browser, editor, etc.) can be installed on the Debian VM itself. But anything that benefits from isolation
(like trying different versions of a tool) can be containerized.
Using a microservices architecture with Docker means each part of the OS is independently deployable and
upgradeable
. This greatly eases maintenance: for example, you can update the AI model container
without disturbing the database or web UI containers. It also enhances reliability and security – if one
component crashes or has a vulnerability, it’s isolated from others. And importantly, this modularity aligns
with making the OS expandable: you can add new containers (new features) at any time, and if there’s more
hardware, you can allocate these containers across the machines to balance the load.
Docker Setup: We will install Docker Engine within the Debian Trixie environment on at least one of the
nodes (e.g., on both the MacBook’s and iMac’s Debian VMs). Both nodes should be able to run containers.
Because these Debian instances share the same kernel with their VM host only (not with each other or
macOS), each will have its own Docker daemon. However, we will unify management through Kubernetes
(coming  next),  which  will  schedule  containers  on  either  node  as  needed.  The  Docker  installation  is
straightforward via the official Docker CE packages for Debian, or we could utilize containerd (which is the
underlying runtime Docker uses) directly with Kubernetes. 
11
12
13
4

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

One consideration on macOS: Docker Desktop for Mac could have been an option to run containers, but
since we are running Debian in VMs, we’ll be running Docker inside the Linux VMs directly (this avoids any
Mac-specific limitations and uses standard Linux containerization). As a result, our containers will be
running on a Linux kernel (from the Debian VM) which is ideal for compatibility.
It’s worth noting that we are effectively combining  virtual machines and containers: this is not only
acceptable, but often recommended for portable, modular deployments
. The VMs give us the correct
OS environment (Linux) and isolation from the host, while Docker gives us isolation of applications within
that environment. 
Kubernetes Cluster Orchestration
With Docker providing the containerization, we introduce Kubernetes to handle orchestration – in other
words,  to  manage  and  coordinate  all  these  containers  across  our  two  (eventually  more)  machines.
Kubernetes will treat our collection of hardware as a single unified pool of resources on which it can run
containerized workloads. This brings several advantages essential to a cloud OS: automatic rescheduling of
services if a node goes down, easy scaling of services (deploying more container instances if load increases),
and a declarative way to describe the system’s desired state (so everything can be brought up or healed
automatically).
Choosing Kubernetes Distribution: A full Kubernetes installation (as used in large data centers) can be
quite heavy for a small two-node setup. Fortunately, there are lightweight Kubernetes distributions. We will
use K3s (by Rancher/SUSE) – a minimal, single-binary Kubernetes that is perfect for this scenario
.
K3s is a CNCF-certified Kubernetes, meaning it behaves just like standard Kubernetes but is optimized for
resource-constrained or edge environments. It has a tiny footprint (under 100 MB binary) and simplifies a
lot of the setup (for example, it can use an embedded SQLite datastore by default, instead of a separate
etcd cluster for control plane state). Community experiences have shown K3s to be “ridiculously easy to set
up” and low-maintenance for home labs
 – many homelab and self-hosting enthusiasts have successfully
moved their services to K3s because of its convenience
.
K3s Setup: We will designate one of our Debian nodes as the Kubernetes master (server) and the other as
a worker (agent). For reliability, the iMac’s Debian VM is a good choice for the master, since the iMac can be
left powered on as an “always-on” server. The MacBook’s Debian VM will then join as a worker node when it’s
on the network. Installing K3s is as simple as running a script on the master node: 
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh -
Within about 30 seconds, this will turn that machine into a single-node Kubernetes cluster (server)
.
By default, K3s will start the Kubernetes API server, scheduler, controllers, and etc., and even register the
node as a worker too (so the master can run workloads)
. Next, on the second node (the MacBook’s
Debian), we run the installer with two environment variables pointing to the master’s address and join
token. For example
:
7
14
15
14
16
17
18
19
20
21
5

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

export K3S_URL="https://<MasterNodeIP>:6443"
export K3S_TOKEN="<the join token from master>"
curl -sfL https://get.k3s.io | sh -
This command will install K3s and automatically join the node to the cluster as an agent
. In a few
moments, the MacBook node will appear in the cluster. We can verify on the master with kubectl get 
nodes  (K3s includes  kubectl  or we can use an external kubectl pointing to the cluster) to see both
nodes listed.
K3s Networking and Integration: K3s by default uses an embedded networking layer (flannel) and a default
service load balancer/ingress for exposing services. All of this is preconfigured, meaning our two nodes
should form a coherent network for containers without extra work. The Debian VMs will each have their
own IP on our LAN – K3s will create an overlay network so that containers can communicate across hosts as
if on one network. We should ensure that the necessary ports are open between the machines (K3s server
uses port 6443 for API, and flannel/agent communication uses UDP ports in the 8472 range for overlays,
etc., which on a LAN should be fine by default).
Going forward, we will  deploy applications via Kubernetes manifest files or Helm charts, rather than
manually running  docker run . For instance, if we want to run a database container, we can write a
Kubernetes  Deployment  for  it.  Kubernetes  will  decide  which  node  to  run  it  on  (based  on  resource
availability or rules we set). If the MacBook is offline, the master node can run critical services alone (since
it’s also a worker). When the MacBook comes online, Kubernetes can distribute some load to it – effectively
balancing the use of hardware.
Cluster State and Storage: In our initial single-master setup, K3s will likely use an embedded SQLite
datastore on the master node to store cluster state. This is fine for a small cluster. We should take backups
of this state (K3s provides a script to backup the data) especially before making major changes. In the
future, when adding the Supermicro server, we might convert to a high-availability setup (multiple masters)
for resilience, which would involve using an external datastore like etcd or MySQL for K3s. For now, a single
master is acceptable for simplicity.
Using the Cluster: Now we have a functioning Kubernetes cluster spanning the two machines. We will use
kubectl  (the  Kubernetes  command-line  tool)  to  interact  with  it.  For  example,  deploying  our  AI/OS
services  might  involve  steps  like:  -  Creating  Namespaces to  group  certain  applications  (perhaps  a
namespace for core OS services, one for AI services, one for monitoring, etc.). - Deploying our containers as
Deployments or  StatefulSets depending on their nature (stateless vs stateful). - Exposing services via
Services or Ingress so that they can be accessed (for example, an ingress to reach a web UI, or a service
that the MATE desktop can connect to internally). - Using Persistent Volume Claims for any service that
needs disk storage (this is where our storage node or iMac’s disk comes into play – we might use NFS or
hostPath volumes for now to store data, and later migrate to the Supermicro’s storage).
Kubernetes will handle ensuring the desired number of container replicas are running. Should one of the
machines go down or a container crash, Kubernetes can restart or reschedule those workloads on the
available machine automatically, offering a level of self-healing.
22
23
6

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure: Architecture of a K3s cluster with one server node and multiple agent nodes. In our setup, the iMac’s
Debian VM serves as the K3s server (control plane + agent), and the MacBook’s VM joins as an agent. Kubernetes
manages containerized services across both.
By adopting Kubernetes, expansion is straightforward: when you add the Supermicro server later, you can
simply install K3s on it with the appropriate  K3S_URL  and  K3S_TOKEN  as an agent (or possibly as a
second master, if aiming for HA). It will join the cluster, and its immense resources (CPU, RAM, disk) become
available for scheduling pods. This could allow you, for example, to scale out an AI workload to use all
machines or to offload heavy tasks to the powerful server. Kubernetes acts as the “operating system” of
your cloud, abstracting the hardware into a unified resource pool.
Leveraging Hardware Capabilities
One of the objectives is to leverage the best that the hardware has to offer. Our design ensures that
each piece of hardware can be utilized to its strengths within the cluster:
CPU and Performance: Both the MacBook Pro’s i9 processor and the iMac’s processor contribute
computing power. Docker and Kubernetes allow running workloads in parallel across all CPU cores of
both machines. For compute-intensive tasks (like AI model inference or data processing), pods can
be scheduled on the machine that has free CPU cycles. If an AI service container requires a lot of
CPU, Kubernetes might place it on the iMac when the MacBook is away or busy, or vice versa. We
could also label nodes and dedicate certain tasks to the more powerful CPU if needed. This parallel
usage of processors means the combined cluster can handle more than either machine alone.
Memory and Efficiency: With 32 GB and 48 GB RAM on the two systems, memory is abundant. This
is ideal for running memory-hungry applications (e.g. caching services, in-memory databases, or
machine learning models loaded into RAM). By containerizing apps, we can run many services
without the overhead of launching separate VMs for each – containers share the OS and can utilize
memory more efficiently than multiple full OS instances would
. For example, the base Debian
OS might use a couple of gigabytes, leaving tens of GB free for containers. If one node’s RAM starts
filling up, we can deploy new containers to the other node to balance the usage.
Storage and I/O: The MacBook’s 1 TB SSD is very fast, great for databases or I/O intensive tasks. The
iMac’s 1 TB Fusion Drive is slower for random I/O, but still offers capacity. We might designate the
MacBook’s storage for performance-sensitive workloads (like a database PV) and use the iMac’s
storage for less I/O intensive or backup purposes. In Kubernetes, this can be managed by using
node  selectors  or  affinity  rules  for  certain  pods,  or  by  setting  up  storage  classes.  When  the
Supermicro  with  (presumably)  many  drives  comes  in,  we  will  integrate  it  as  a  central  storage
provider – for example, by setting it up to run a NAS software or exporting NFS shares to the cluster.
We could then mount those shares in the Debian VMs or use a Kubernetes NFS-client provisioner to
let pods claim space on the NAS. This would effectively  centralize the storage so that data is
accessible regardless of which node a container runs on. Backup routines can be offloaded to the
Supermicro as well.
Networking: By using a direct Ethernet connection, we maximize network throughput between
containers on different hosts. If we run, say, a distributed database cluster or a web server on one
24
• 
• 
11
• 
• 
7

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

node and its backend on another, the gigabit (or higher, if using adapters that support 10GbE in
future) link ensures they communicate swiftly. Also, for accessing the cloud OS from the outside, we
can take advantage of the network. For instance, if you want to access your Debian/MATE desktop
remotely (from the internet), you could expose the X2Go or RDP service via a secure ingress or
tunnel. Likewise, any web services can be exposed through the iMac’s network (which could have a
DNS name pointed to it). The cluster can handle ingress routing to direct traffic to whichever node
currently runs the service.
GPU and Special Hardware: If either Mac has a notable GPU (some 2019 MacBook Pros and 2017
iMacs have Radeon GPUs), leveraging them is tricky in this setup because macOS and standard VMs
don’t easily give GPU access to Linux. If GPU computing is desired for AI (like running CUDA
workloads),  one  might  consider  using  an  external  GPU  (eGPU)  or  eventually  the  GPUs  in  the
Supermicro (if any) directly on a Linux install. For now, we assume CPU-based computing. However,
it’s good to know that the architecture could be adjusted to allow GPU pass-through with the right
hypervisor or by running Debian directly on hardware later for those needs.
Full OS Features: The user mentioned “all features needed” – implying the cloud OS should feel like
a complete OS, not a limited container set. Thanks to Debian + MATE, we indeed have a full OS: you
can run graphical applications, browse the web, play media, etc., by connecting to the virtual
desktop. Features like sound can be enabled over X2Go (it can forward sound), and USB devices can
even be passed into VMs if needed (VirtualBox and others allow USB passthrough, so you could
connect a device to the Mac and have Debian see it). Printing and file transfer are also possible
(X2Go  can  share  clipboard  and  folders).  So  essentially,  nothing  stops  this  environment  from
providing the same features as a normal desktop OS – except now it’s running in a cloud-like setup.
Users benefit from scenarios like running long tasks on the iMac VM without tying up their MacBook,
as DigitalOcean’s guide noted: your local device remains free while the server does the heavy work
.
In summary, by carefully distributing workloads and using the appropriate tools (containers for efficiency,
cluster scheduling for load balancing, remote desktop for UI), we ensure each hardware component is
utilized optimally. The design avoids idle resources: if one machine isn’t being actively used, it can still run
background containers for the cloud OS. And when both are in use, they collaboratively share the load.
Deploying AI/OS Components and Services
Now that the infrastructure is in place, we focus on the actual AI/OS features and how to implement them
on this platform. The term “AI/OS” suggests the operating system has integrated AI capabilities or is aimed
at AI development and usage. Below are some examples of features one might include and how they’d be
deployed:
AI Assistant / Chatbot: Suppose the OS has an AI assistant service (for example, a natural language
chatbot that can answer questions or control aspects of the OS). We can implement this by running
an AI model server (maybe something like an instance of GPT-J or a smaller LLM, or a service calling
an external AI API) in a container. If it’s open-source, we might containerize the model runtime (with
libraries like PyTorch, TensorFlow, etc. in the image). This container could expose an API (e.g., a REST
or gRPC endpoint). The assistant front-end (perhaps a GUI app or a terminal client on the MATE
desktop) would communicate with this API. By containerizing, we ensure the heavy ML libraries and
• 
• 
25
• 
8

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

dependencies are isolated. If we upgrade the model or switch to a different framework, we just
deploy a new container version. The cluster can allocate this container to run on the machine with
more free GPU/CPU as needed.
Voice Recognition or Personal Assistant Daemon: If voice control is a feature, a service like
DeepSpeech or another speech-to-text engine could run in a container, possibly on the machine
with a microphone attached (or on the server if audio streams are forwarded). Kubernetes can
ensure it runs where it can access the audio input (through device plugins or by routing audio over
the network).
Data  Storage  and  Knowledge  Base: An  AI/OS  might  need  to  store  data  like  notes,  vector
embeddings for semantic search, etc. A database container (SQL or NoSQL) can serve this need. We
would deploy, say, a PostgreSQL container, with a persistent volume mount. Because we intend the
Supermicro to be a storage hub, we might not worry about huge data until that is set up; once
available, we could relocate the database storage to that machine (e.g., via an NFS volume). For now,
using the iMac’s disk for persistent data is fine. As a precaution, we should schedule periodic
backups of important volumes (perhaps by using a backup container or external backup to the
Supermicro).
Web Interface: It could be useful to have a web-based interface to some OS functions (especially if
accessing  from  devices  where  you  can’t  use  X2Go  easily,  like  a  phone).  For  example,  a  web
dashboard that shows system status, allows issuing commands, or chatting with the AI assistant.
This can be hosted with a lightweight web server container. We might run an Nginx reverse proxy as
well to route external requests to the appropriate service (Kubernetes ingress can also do this, but
sometimes a dedicated reverse proxy with authentication is handy for a personal setup).
Desktop Applications: Most regular desktop applications (LibreOffice, GIMP, etc.) can be installed
directly in the Debian MATE VMs for use when connected via remote desktop. However, to keep the
system modular, one could also use containerized applications with GUI, delivered via something like
X11 forwarding or VNC. For instance, Docker images exist for browsers or IDEs. In practice, given
that we have a full VM anyway, installing these apps normally might be simpler. The modularity focus
is more on backend services and AI components.
Supporting Services: We can enhance the OS with additional services: 
Monitoring (e.g., Prometheus/Grafana containers) to keep an eye on resource usage across the
cluster.
Automation tools (like Home Assistant or Node-RED if integrating with home automation).
Dev tools like a Git server or CI runner in containers, if the environment is used for development.
File synchronization or cloud storage: Since a cloud OS implies access to files from anywhere, we
could run something like Nextcloud in a container to provide a personal cloud storage solution. The
Supermicro’s large storage could back this. Users could then access files via WebDAV/Nextcloud
clients, effectively creating a personal Dropbox-like service as part of the OS.
Because Kubernetes is in charge, deploying these is uniform: each new feature is defined in YAML and
launched into the cluster. The cluster ensures they find a place to run. For example, we might set the AI
inference service to have an affinity for the iMac node (with more RAM), and maybe the web server can run
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
9

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

on the MacBook node, etc. If one node gets overloaded, we can shift workloads – say, run the database on
the Supermicro when it’s added, to free up Mac resources for interactive use.
Security is another aspect to consider: with multiple networked components, we should enforce safe
configurations.  Luckily,  within  the  cluster,  Kubernetes  can  limit  which  pods  can  talk  to  which
(NetworkPolicies) and all communications can be kept behind the LAN firewall. For external access, using
SSH tunneling or VPN into the network is recommended rather than exposing services directly to the
internet, unless we set up proper HTTPS and authentication. For example, to access X2Go from outside, one
could SSH into the iMac and forward X2Go’s port, or use a VPN into the home network.
Expansion and Future Integration
The architecture we built is inherently expandable. When you acquire the Supermicro X9QRi-F+ server,
integrating it can enhance both performance and storage: -  Adding to Cluster: The Supermicro can be
installed with a Linux OS (Debian Trixie as well, or perhaps a server-oriented distro) directly on the metal for
maximum performance. We could then install K3s agent on it, just like we did on the MacBook node. Once
joined, it becomes another node in the Kubernetes cluster. You might choose to have it run as a worker
node only, or also host an additional master (for high availability of the control plane). In a K3s HA setup,
you’d run an external database (perhaps the Supermicro could host a MySQL or etcd for K3s HA) and join
two or more masters. But if the iMac remains master and the Supermicro just a worker, that’s acceptable
too, given a homelab environment. - Role of the Storage Hub: With potentially dozens of terabytes of disk
capacity, the Supermicro can act as a NAS or storage node. One approach is to set up a distributed storage
system like Longhorn or Ceph on the cluster, which would use the Supermicro’s disks to provide persistent
volumes to Kubernetes
. This way, any container on any node can request storage and the data
would  reside  on  the  Supermicro  (with  network  access).  Alternatively,  simpler:  run  NFS  server  on  the
Supermicro and use it to host volumes (Kubernetes can then use PersistentVolume definitions that refer to
NFS shares). In both cases, the idea is to centralize data so that if, for example, your AI database runs on the
MacBook today and tomorrow on the Supermicro, it’s accessing the same underlying storage. - Offloading
Work: The Supermicro, being a multi-CPU powerhouse, could take on the heavy lifting. You might migrate
the AI model serving to that machine (more CPU cores for faster inference, or even add a dedicated GPU to
it for AI acceleration). It could also run backups of all data (to an external drive or cloud). Kubernetes can be
instructed via taints/tolerations to dedicate certain workloads to the Supermicro (for instance, mark it as a
“storage” or “batch jobs” node). 
The cluster can be expanded beyond this as well. If you later add more nodes (maybe some Raspberry Pi
nodes, or another spare PC), as long as they run a compatible Kubernetes agent, they can join. This is a
unified cloud OS – not confined like a traditional OS to one machine, but living on an elastic cluster. 
We should mention that if the cluster grows significantly, monitoring and management become important.
Tools like Kubernetes Dashboard or Lens can help visualize the cluster. Also, consider setting resource
requests/limits on containers to avoid one container hogging a whole machine unintentionally.
Finally,  multi-cluster vs  single-cluster: The user had indicated interest in “both” eventually – possibly
running more than one cluster. With our current design, one cluster is sufficient to span all hardware.
However, there are scenarios for multiple clusters: for example, a separate cluster for experimenting with
different configurations (maybe using k3d or kind to spin up a test cluster inside), or a second cluster in a
cloud provider for off-site tasks that integrates with the home cluster. Kubernetes Federation or simply
26
18
10

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 11
------------------------------------------------------------------------

using separate kubeconfigs would allow managing them. The modular nature we’ve built means you could
move certain workloads to another cluster if needed (since they’re just containers defined by code). But to
keep things simple, you might only go multi-cluster if necessary, and otherwise just enlarge the single
cluster.
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a comprehensive plan for constructing a personal expandable, modular cloud
OS using existing hardware and modern container orchestration tools. By using Debian Trixie with the MATE
desktop, we retain a full-featured Linux OS environment (complete with GUI) that can be accessed from
anywhere, fulfilling the vision of a “cloud desktop” that is always available
. Docker containers are
employed to break down the system into modular pieces, allowing each service or feature to be developed,
updated,  and  scaled  independently  –  an  approach  that  maximizes  the  efficient  use  of  the  powerful
MacBook Pro and iMac resources while maintaining flexibility
. Kubernetes (via K3s) ties everything
together, turning the two machines into a unified cluster that can seamlessly grow by adding new nodes
. The result is an environment where hardware boundaries blur: it doesn’t matter which physical
machine  you’re  using;  you  interact  with  the  AI/OS  and  its  applications  uniformly,  and  the  system
automatically allocates tasks to the available hardware.
This design leverages each component optimally – from CPU multi-threading to large RAM usage and high-
speed networking – and is prepared for future enhancements like the integration of a dedicated storage
server. It is, essentially, your own private cloud. By following the steps and considerations outlined (from
setting up Debian VMs and X2Go remote desktops, to deploying microservices and configuring K3s), one
can build an advanced setup that would traditionally be found in enterprise environments, but at home.
Such a cloud OS not only provides a rich computing experience (with all features of a normal OS) but also
resilience and scalability: if one node is busy or down, the services persist on another; as demands increase,
new services can be added or scaled out easily.
In implementing this, one will gain valuable experience in modern infrastructure technology, and also the
practical  benefit  of  a  powerful,  centralized  computing  platform  for  personal  or  development  use.
Remember to keep security in mind (use SSH tunnels, firewall rules, and monitor your services), and
maintain  the  system  (apply  updates  to  Debian,  Docker,  and  Kubernetes  regularly,  and  check  that
Kubernetes certificates are renewed to avoid any expiry issues as noted by others running home clusters).
With care and tweaking, this expandable cloud OS will serve as a robust foundation for any projects –
especially AI-related – you undertake, combining the convenience of a traditional OS with the “always-on,
remotely-accessible” power of the cloud
.
Sources:
Alexandru  Andrei,  Matt  Abrams.  “How  To  Set  Up  a  Remote  Desktop  with  X2Go  on  Debian  10.”
DigitalOcean, 27 May 2020. – Explains the concept of a “cloud desktop” and using X2Go for always-
online remote GUI access
.
UpGuard.  “Docker  vs  VMware:  How  Do  They  Stack  Up?” –  Discusses  the  differences  between
containerization and full virtualization, noting that Docker containers are more lightweight than VMs
and ideal for modular, portable software deployments
.
8
6
11
15
10
1. 
8
1
2. 
11
6
11

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 12
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hacker News discussion. “Converting an old MacBook into an always-on personal Kubernetes cluster.”
(March 2020) – Community members recommend K3s for home clusters due to its light weight and
ease of setup
 and share positive experiences running self-hosted services on K3s
.
K3s Official Documentation – K3s is a simplified, single-binary Kubernetes distribution designed for
resource-constrained environments
. Its installation and architecture (server/agent model) make
it easy to add nodes to our cluster with a one-line command
.
LinkedIn Post by Reza Bojnordi (2025) – Highlights new features in Debian 13 “Trixie,” including
updated desktop environments (MATE 1.26) and improved cloud support
, confirming the use of
MATE on Debian Trixie for a modern desktop experience.
How To Set Up a Remote Desktop with X2Go on Debian 10 | DigitalOcean
https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-a-remote-desktop-with-x2go-on-debian-10
Supermicro X9QRI-F+ Motherboard - Amazon.com
https://www.amazon.com/Supermicro-MBD-X9QRI-F-B-X9QRI-F-Motherboard/dp/B00B2W81LK
Supermicro MBD-X9QRi-F+ Quad Socket R(LGA 2011) 6x ... - eBiz Pc
https://www.ebizpc.com/Supermicro-MBD-X9QRi-F-Quad-Socket-R-LGA-2011-p/mbd-x9qri-fplus.htm?
srsltid=AfmBOoqfhZF0ijJ2QVMN4JJgBuRsqOzm2WrgkGp_It9igrhGefF3ZVOe
Debian 13 "Trixie" released with new features | Reza Bojnordi posted on the topic | LinkedIn
https://www.linkedin.com/posts/rezabojnordi_debian-linux-debian13-activity-7327339449548206080-ivQT
Docker vs VMWare: How Do They Stack Up? | UpGuard
https://www.upguard.com/blog/docker-vs-vmware-how-do-they-stack-up
Converting an old MacBook into an always-on personal Kubernetes cluster | Hacker News
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=22661029
K3s
https://k3s.io/
What is K3s? Architecture, Setup, and Security - Aqua
https://www.aquasec.com/cloud-native-academy/kubernetes-101/k3s/
3. 
14
16
4. 
15
22
23
5. 
27
1
8
9
10
25
2
3
4
5
27
6
7
11
12
13
14
16
15
17
18
26
19
20
21
22
23
24
12
