Configuring Docker & Kubernetes Networking on
macOS for Direct Ethernet Access
Introduction
This report explains how to configure Docker containers and Kubernetes pods on macOS (Ventura or newer)
for direct network communication over an Ethernet connection. We focus on post-installation networking
setup in both development (on the Mac) and production environments. In our scenario, the goal is to host a
Debian  “Trixie”  environment  (Debian-based  OS  with  Python  3.12  and  a  PyGPT service)  inside  Docker/
Kubernetes, and allow these containers/pods to communicate with other machines on the local network.
We will not cover Docker or Kubernetes installation steps, but instead detail how to configure networking –
including IP addressing, port forwarding, bridge-mode networking, and direct access – so that the cloud OS
stack running in Docker/Kubernetes can be reached as if it were any other host on the Ethernet LAN.
Networking Challenges on macOS
On macOS, Docker does not run containers on the host OS directly – it uses a lightweight virtual machine
(VM) under the hood. This has important implications for networking. Unlike Docker on Linux, macOS does
not expose the Docker VM’s bridge network ( docker0 ) to the host. In fact, you will not see a docker0
interface on macOS at all – it exists only inside the VM
. Consequently, the Mac cannot directly route
traffic to container IP addresses
. You cannot ping container/pod IPs from the Mac host, and “per-
container IP addressing is not possible” on Docker Desktop for Mac
. In other words, each container’s
internal IP is isolated behind the VM’s NAT. By default, containers and pods are not directly accessible
from the Mac host or other devices on the LAN without special configuration
.
These limitations mean that bridging modes or direct container network access that are trivial on Linux
require workarounds on macOS. We’ll outline those shortly. First, it’s key to understand that on macOS, any
container or Kubernetes node network is typically NAT’d through the host. The Docker VM shares the Mac’s
network connection, but acts like a separate machine with its own internal subnet. Therefore,  network
services running in containers must be explicitly exposed for other machines to reach them. We must
use techniques like port forwarding, since simply trying to use the container’s IP address from another host
will fail.
Post-Installation Setup on macOS (Development)
After installing Docker Desktop on macOS and enabling its Kubernetes single-node cluster (via Docker
Desktop settings), we need to configure networking so our containers/pods are reachable from the local
Ethernet network. Here are the key steps and options in a development environment:
1
2
2
3
1

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. IP Configuration of the Host
Ensure the Mac itself has a proper IP on the Ethernet network. In a development setup, the Mac will act as
the gateway for container access, so it’s helpful to use a static IP or DHCP reservation for the Mac on your
LAN. This way, other devices have a consistent address to connect to. For example, if your Mac is given
192.168.1.100  on a wired LAN, that will be the IP clients use to reach services running in Docker/K8s.
Using Ethernet (as opposed to Wi-Fi) is preferable, because advanced networking modes like bridging or
macvlan require a wired network – most Wi-Fi adapters do not support being part of a bridge or handling
multiple MAC addresses
. In short, use a stable wired network connection and note the Mac’s IP address
on that network.
2. Docker Container Networking – Port Forwarding
On macOS, the simplest and most reliable way to allow external access to a container is by publishing
its ports to the host. Docker’s port mapping ( -p  or --publish  flag) will forward traffic from a port on
the Mac to a port on the container inside the VM
. For instance, if you run: 
docker run -d -p 8080:80 --name myweb myimage
This maps port 80 in the container to port 8080 on the Mac. Any service listening on container port 80 will
be reachable at <Mac_IP>:8080  from other machines. Port forwarding is the recommended workaround
on Docker Desktop
 – Docker will ensure that connections to the Mac’s localhost (and by extension, the
Mac’s IP) on the published port are routed into the container. For example, if your PyGPT application runs on
port 5000 inside the container, you could do -p 5000:5000  to expose it. After starting the container with
the appropriate -p  flags, verify on the Mac that the ports are listening (using lsof  or netstat ), and
ensure macOS’s firewall isn’t blocking them (allow Docker or the specific ports through, if the firewall is
enabled).
Access from other machines: With ports published, other devices can connect using the Mac’s IP and the
forwarded port number. For example, if the Mac is 192.168.1.100  and we ran -p 5000:5000 , another
PC can reach the service via  http://192.168.1.100:5000 . This is confirmed by Docker users: once
ports are forwarded and open, you simply use the host Mac’s IP and port from remote devices
. The
container’s internal IP remains hidden – but the service is accessible through the host. This approach covers
most development needs: it’s straightforward and requires no special network drivers. Each container or
service just needs to have its required ports published on the Mac. (If you have many services, you might
choose a scheme of unique ports, or use an HTTP reverse proxy to map host ports to containers, etc.)
3. Kubernetes on Docker Desktop – NodePort and Ingress
If you’re using the Kubernetes cluster included with Docker Desktop for development, the pattern is similar:
you must expose services in Kubernetes so they can be reached from outside. By default, Kubernetes pods
get an internal IP (often in a range like 10.x.x.x) that is only reachable within the VM/cluster. To make an
application accessible externally on macOS, you have a few options: -  NodePort Service: Create your
Service with type: NodePort . Kubernetes will allocate a port (typically in the 30000-32767 range) on the
node (the Docker Desktop VM). Although the  EXTERNAL-IP  of the node might show as  <none>  in
kubectl get nodes , you can use the Mac’s IP as the node address. In Docker Desktop’s K8s, the “node”
4
5
6
6
7
2

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

is essentially the host. So, to reach a NodePort service, connect to  <Mac_IP>:<NodePort>
. For
example,  if  you  expose  PyGPT  via  a  NodePort  32000,  and  your  Mac  is  192.168.1.100,  use
192.168.1.100:32000  from other machines. (Make sure the Mac’s firewall allows the NodePort range or
the specific port.) - LoadBalancer Service with MetalLB: Docker Desktop’s K8s does not provide a cloud
load balancer, but you can simulate one. MetalLB is a popular add-on for bare-metal clusters that can also
work in a single-node dev cluster. MetalLB can allocate a service an IP address on your local network and
advertise  it  via  ARP.  For  example,  you  might  configure  MetalLB  with  a  pool  like
192.168.1.240-192.168.1.250  
on  your  LAN.  When  you  create  a
 Service  
of
type: LoadBalancer , MetalLB will assign one of those IPs to the service and make the cluster respond
to that IP. In Layer2 mode, MetalLB’s speakers answer ARP requests for the service IP directly on the
network (mapping it to a node’s MAC)
. This means other machines can reach the service at that IP as if
it were a real host. In a Docker Desktop scenario, getting this to work requires that the Kubernetes VM can
actually reach and be reached on the LAN IP – which is tricky because of the Mac’s NAT. A workaround is to
use the special routing tool (discussed below) so that the Mac routes those requests into the cluster. In
practice, for dev on Mac you might choose NodePort for simplicity, but it’s good to know MetalLB can be
used to mimic a real LoadBalancer in testing (and we will definitely use MetalLB in production). - Ingress
Controller: Another approach is to run an ingress controller (like Nginx or Traefik) in the cluster and expose
that via a NodePort or LoadBalancer. For example, you could run Nginx Ingress listening on port 80/443 of
the cluster and then publish those via NodePort (mapping to host ports 80/443) or via MetalLB with a LAN
IP. Then you can reach multiple services by host name or path through this single entry point. Docker
Desktop’s K8s doesn’t come with an ingress by default (unless enabled), so you’d deploy one. If you choose
NodePort ingress, you could even use port forwarding on the Docker side to map Mac’s port 80 to the
ingress NodePort, achieving http://<Mac_IP>  serving the cluster’s apps.
In summary, for development on macOS: - Expose container ports with -p  (Docker) or define NodePort/
LoadBalancer Services (K8s). - Use the Mac’s IP address as the target for clients on the LAN (since the Mac
bridges the outside world to the Docker VM)
. - Ensure networking on the Mac side (IP configuration,
firewall) is set to allow this access.
4. Advanced: Bridging and Direct Container Networking on Mac
Because Docker on Mac is VM-based, standard Linux “bridge mode” or “macvlan” networking is not directly
available on the host
. However, if you require direct container addressing (for example, you want to
assign a container or pod its own IP on the LAN), there are a couple of advanced options and tools:
docker-mac-net-connect: This open-source utility uses a lightweight WireGuard tunnel to connect
the Docker Desktop VM’s internal networks with the macOS host. It creates a virtual network
interface ( utun ) on macOS and routes the Docker subnet through it
. In effect, it allows your
Mac to communicate with container IP addresses directly (e.g., you could ping a container’s 172.x.x.x
IP from macOS)
. Installation is simple (available via Homebrew) and it runs a background service
on the Mac
. With this tool running, the Docker VM’s networks become reachable from the host
as  if  they  were  bridged.  This  can  greatly  simplify  testing  scenarios  where  you  need  to  treat
containers as first-class hosts on the network.  Note: By default this setup makes container IPs
reachable from the Mac host. If you also want other physical machines to reach those container IPs,
you would need to add routes on those machines (pointing the Docker subnet to the Mac’s IP as a
gateway) or implement similar tunneling on your router. In many cases, it’s easier to stick to the port-
8
9
8
10
• 
11
12
13
3

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

forward/NodePort method for external access, but this tool is excellent for enabling direct host ↔
container communication in development
.
Colima/Custom VM with Bridged Networking: Instead of Docker Desktop, some developers use
Colima (which leverages Lima/QEMU) or other VM solutions where you have more control over
networking. It’s possible to configure a Linux VM on macOS with bridged networking (connecting
the VM’s Ethernet interface directly to the Mac’s Ethernet adapter). If you run Docker/K3s in such a
VM, that VM can get its own LAN IP from the router (just like any other machine on the network). The
containers or K8s nodes inside would then effectively be on the network. However, setting up a
custom VM or using Colima with bridged mode is beyond the scope of Docker Desktop’s default
setup. It’s an option if you need the Docker daemon itself to have a LAN IP. Otherwise, Docker
Desktop’s approach with NAT + port forwarding (or the WireGuard trick above) is usually sufficient
for dev on Mac.
Host networking mode: For completeness, note that Docker’s  --network=host  (which lets a
container share the host’s network stack) is not supported on Docker Desktop for Mac/Win
.
On Linux, that mode is useful to eliminate port mappings (the container just uses the host’s IP), but
on macOS you cannot use it – the host mode would only refer to the VM’s network, which doesn’t
solve external access. So, for Mac, stick to the methods described above.
By using the above configurations, you can develop on macOS and have your “cloud OS” stack reachable as
needed. For instance, you might run a Kubernetes cluster on your Mac with MetalLB handing out a service
IP like 192.168.1.241 to PyGPT – then thanks to the routing/bridge tool or NodePort exposure, you can point
your browser or API client from another machine to 192.168.1.241 (or to the Mac’s IP and NodePort) and hit
the service.
Production Environment Considerations
In production (which presumably involves Linux servers or an on-premises Kubernetes cluster), you have
more direct networking options. The goal remains the same – allow containers or services to communicate
over the Ethernet LAN – but without the macOS virtualization limitations. Below we address both Docker
and Kubernetes in production:
Docker on Linux – Bridged and Macvlan Networks
On a Linux host running Docker, containers run on the host’s kernel, so you  can leverage true bridged
networking or macvlan networks: -  Bridge Networks: By default, Docker on Linux creates a  docker0
bridge. Containers attached to this bridge get an IP (e.g., 172.17.0.X) and the host does forwarding for
them. Other machines cannot directly reach those IPs unless routing is set up. However, you can create a
user-defined bridge or use host networking as needed. If you want containers to be directly accessible, the
default approach is still to publish ports to the host’s IP (just like on Mac). The difference is, on Linux the
overhead is lower and you could also configure routing if needed. - Macvlan Networks: Docker’s macvlan
driver allows you to attach containers to the physical network by virtually cloning the host’s NIC at the link
layer. Each container gets its  own IP and MAC address on the LAN
. For example, if your host is
192.168.1.10/24, you could create a macvlan network with parent  eth0  on that subnet (say assign
192.168.1.200-250 for containers). A container launched on this network can be given an IP in that range,
like 192.168.1.201, and it will appear as an independent device on the network. This means other hosts can
12
• 
• 
14
15
4

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

directly communicate with it at 192.168.1.201. This is ideal for “appliance-like” containers (databases, etc.)
that should be peers on the LAN. Important: Macvlan is only available on Linux hosts – it is not supported
on Docker Desktop for Mac/Windows
. It also requires a wired connection; most wireless interfaces
cannot handle multiple MAC addresses or bridging (so if your server has Wi-Fi only, macvlan won’t work
properly)
.  In  production,  assuming  a  wired  Ethernet,  macvlan  is  a  powerful  option  for  direct
connectivity. One caveat: the host machine cannot directly communicate with containers on its macvlan
network (the host is effectively excluded from that virtual network by default). If the host needs to talk to
those containers, a common workaround is to create a “macvlan gateway” by attaching a small container or
a dummy interface on the host to the macvlan network, or use Docker’s ipvlan driver in certain modes. This
is a low-level detail, but worth knowing if your container needs to reach a service on the host or vice versa. -
Host Network Mode: On Linux, you can run containers with  --network=host , meaning they use the
host’s network namespace. In production, this is used for certain workloads (e.g., a container that should
just bind directly to the host’s NIC). For example, if you run a container this way, it will listen on the host’s IP
address for incoming traffic (no separate IP needed). This can be useful for running something like a
monitoring  agent  or  a  web  server  that  should  just  be  reachable  on  the  host’s  IP  without  any  port
translation. Be cautious with this in multi-container setups as ports can conflict. This isn’t an option on
macOS Docker, but on Linux it is fully supported.
In a production Docker environment, you might use a combination of these strategies. For instance, you
could assign your PyGPT container a dedicated IP via macvlan so it’s directly reachable on the LAN, while
perhaps mapping legacy services via host ports. The configuration depends on how “visible” you want each
container to be. The key is that, on Linux, networking is flexible – you can closely mimic a normal host for
each container when needed.
Kubernetes on Bare Metal – Service Networking
For production deployment with Kubernetes (outside of cloud providers), you need to plan both  pod
networking and service exposure on the LAN: - CNI Plugin for Pod Networking: Ensure your cluster has
a Container Network Interface (CNI) plugin installed (common ones are  Calico, Flannel, Weave, Cilium,
etc.). This handles connectivity between pods  within the cluster. For example, Flannel might create an
overlay network (VXLAN) for pods, or Calico might configure routing for pod subnets. Typically, pods will get
IPs in a cluster-only CIDR (e.g., 10.244.x.x with Flannel). By itself, this doesn’t give external access, but it
allows all pods across nodes to communicate. Choose a CNI that suits your environment (Calico is powerful,
allowing BGP routing for advanced cases; Flannel is simple). For most, you’ll use the default NAT mode for
outbound traffic – meaning pods can reach out to the internet or LAN via the node’s IP with source NAT. If
you require that pods themselves have routable IPs on the LAN (a less common requirement), there are
options like Calico IP-in-IP or BGP routing, but that gets complex. Generally, you don’t expose pods directly –
you expose Services. - Exposing Services – NodePort and MetalLB: On a bare-metal Kubernetes cluster,
you won’t have a cloud load balancer to automatically assign public IPs. Instead, you use NodePorts or
deploy MetalLB for LoadBalancer support: - NodePort: As described in the dev setup, a NodePort service
makes your app available on a port on every cluster node. You can then reach the service by hitting any
node’s IP on that port. For production, this could be acceptable if you have only a couple of nodes and can
predict their IPs. However, NodePorts are often high-numbered and not the easiest to manage for many
services. They also might require adjusting firewall rules to open those ports on the nodes. -  MetalLB
(LoadBalancer): MetalLB is the recommended solution for direct, cloud-like service IPs on bare metal. In
L2 mode, MetalLB will utilize your physical network. You provide a pool of IPs (or a range) from your subnet
that aren’t otherwise in use (for example, if your router’s DHCP gives out .100-.200, you might reserve .220-.
10
4
5

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

230 for MetalLB). When a LoadBalancer service is created, MetalLB assigns it one of these IPs. The MetalLB
speaker daemon on your nodes will then advertise that IP via ARP so that traffic to that IP is accepted by one
of the nodes
. Essentially, the service IP behaves like a virtual IP on your LAN, shared by the cluster. Any
client on the same network can directly connect to that IP. MetalLB ensures the packets reach the right
node and service. This setup gives a clean “direct access” feel – e.g., your PyGPT service could be given IP
192.168.1.225 by MetalLB, and users just go to that address. Under the hood, whichever node is hosting the
service (or running MetalLB’s leader for that IP) will respond. - Ingress Controller: In production, you may
also deploy an ingress controller (with or without MetalLB). For example, using Nginx Ingress with a
LoadBalancer service can allow multiple HTTP services to be exposed on ports 80/443 of a single IP (using
hostnames). This can simplify access (users just hit a domain name and MetalLB’s IP for the ingress). This is
a common pattern in bare-metal clusters: MetalLB provides a stable IP, and ingress routes traffic internally. -
Direct Pod Access (if needed): Generally, external clients should not talk directly to pod IPs, but if you had
a reason to (perhaps in an IoT or specialized environment), you’d have to set up routing to the pod network.
For instance, with Calico you could enable BGP peering with your physical router so that the router learns
all pod subnets and routes to the nodes. This is advanced and usually avoided unless absolutely necessary.
It’s typically easier and safer to stick with Services, which also give you load-balancing and stability (pod IPs
can change, service IP is virtual but constant).
Firewall and Security: In production, don’t forget to adjust firewalls on the nodes or network to
allow the chosen traffic. If using MetalLB in L2 mode, ensure ARP broadcasts for those IPs aren’t
blocked and that other hosts don’t try to claim them. If using NodePorts, open those ports. It’s wise
to use firewall rules to restrict access to only the needed ports/networks for security.
In summary, for a production Kubernetes cluster on bare metal, installing MetalLB is a key step to achieve
that “direct Ethernet” access feel for services. Combine that with a solid CNI plugin and perhaps an ingress,
and your containerized services will be first-class citizens on the network. 
Conclusion and Recommendations
Configuring Docker and Kubernetes networking on macOS requires understanding the limitations of the
Mac environment and using workarounds to simulate direct network connectivity. In development on
macOS Ventura, port forwarding is your friend – publish container ports or use NodePort services so that
anything running in Docker/K8s is accessible via the Mac’s own IP address
. When more advanced
networking  is  needed  (for  instance,  to  emulate  a  production  network),  tools  like  docker-mac-net-
connect  can bridge the gap by letting your Mac communicate with container networks directly
. Always
prefer a wired Ethernet setup for such use-cases, since bridging or macvlan solutions won’t work well (or at
all) over Wi-Fi
.
For production, if you’re deploying on Linux or on a physical cluster, take advantage of native capabilities:
Docker’s macvlan driver (for true peer IPs on the LAN) and Kubernetes’ MetalLB (for service IPs announced
via ARP) will give your containers and pods direct presence on the network
. Ensure your IP addressing
plan is clear – assign static or reserved IPs as needed, and avoid overlaps between Docker/K8s subnets and
your LAN. Set up CNI plugins in Kubernetes to handle pod networking, and consider an ingress controller
for managing multiple services behind a single endpoint. 
By following these configurations, your Debian Trixie + Python 3.12 “cloud OS” stack running in Docker/
Kubernetes will be reachable to other machines on the Ethernet network just like any physical server would
9
• 
3
7
12
4
9
6

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

be. You’ll have development parity with production in terms of networking, making it easier to develop and
test your PyGPT services locally and then deploy with confidence. The combination of proper port mapping
(or bridging where possible) in development, and robust networking solutions like MetalLB in production,
provides a clear path to achieve direct communication with containers and pods over the network. Enjoy
your cloud stack on macOS, and happy networking!
Sources:
Docker Desktop for Mac networking documentation
Docker Community Forum – Networking advice for Docker Desktop on Mac
Reddit discussion of macOS Docker networking limits
docker-mac-net-connect project (WireGuard-based Docker Mac networking)
Docker Community Forum – Macvlan and Wi-Fi limitations
MetalLB official documentation (Layer 2 mode explanation)
Docker Forums – Using NodePort and MetalLB on Docker Desktop Kubernetes
Docker documentation on host and macvlan network drivers
Networking features in Docker Desktop for Mac | Docker Documentation
https://docker-docs.uclv.cu/docker-for-mac/networking/
Access from Local Network - Docker Desktop - Docker Community Forums
https://forums.docker.com/t/access-from-local-network/133079
Macbook12 macvlan Parent network card - General - Docker Community Forums
https://forums.docker.com/t/macbook12-macvlan-parent-network-card/145761
Kubernetes and Docker Desktop : how to set up External IP for the node - Docker Desktop - Docker
Community Forums
https://forums.docker.com/t/kubernetes-and-docker-desktop-how-to-set-up-external-ip-for-the-node/87823
Configuration :: MetalLB, bare metal load-balancer for Kubernetes
https://metallb.universe.tf/configuration/
MacVLAN Docker Configuration and Virtual Switch Setup in VMware ...
https://www.virtualizationhowto.com/2024/07/macvlan-docker-configuration-and-virtual-switch-setup-in-vmware-esxi/
KinD with MetalLB on macOS · Waddles.org - Wad About Me?
https://waddles.org/2024/06/04/kind-with-metallb-on-macos/
Making Your Docker Network Reachable In MacOS | by Tyler Auerbeck | Medium
https://medium.com/@tylerauerbeck/making-your-docker-network-reachable-in-osx-e68f998f8249
Microservices | OERTX
https://oertx.highered.texas.gov/courseware/lesson/2379/student-old/?task=6
Share macvlan ip address with docker-compose container group
https://serverfault.com/questions/1149096/share-macvlan-ip-address-with-docker-compose-container-group
MacOS user and docker networking limits and testing : r/devops
https://www.reddit.com/r/devops/comments/p47ria/macos_user_and_docker_networking_limits_and/
• 
1
2
6
• 
3
7
• 
16
• 
12
11
• 
4
17
• 
9
• 
8
18
• 
19
10
1
2
5
6
3
7
4
17
8
18
9
10
11
13
12
14
19
15
16
7
