Using Z-Wave Devices with Home Assistant on
macOS Ventura (2017 iMac 5K)
Introduction: This comprehensive guide will show you how to set up Home Assistant on a 2017 iMac 5K
running macOS Ventura, and integrate a Zooz “S7” (Zooz ZST10 700 Series S2) Z-Wave USB stick to control
common Z-Wave smart devices. We’ll cover support for various device types (sensors, switches, locks,
thermostats,  etc.),  step-by-step  installation  of  Home  Assistant  natively  on  macOS,  optional  Docker
deployment, connecting the Zooz stick (including any Ventura-specific driver or permission settings), and
best practices for home automation and security. Clear instructions, tips, and troubleshooting steps are
provided to ensure a smooth setup. 
Overview of Z-Wave Device Support in Home Assistant
Home  Assistant’s  Z-Wave  integration  (powered  by  Z-Wave  JS)  is  compatible  with  all  standard  Z-Wave
certified devices – you are not limited to any specific brand or model. Any Z-Wave Plus controller, such as
the  Zooz  700  Series  S2  stick,  can  communicate  with  Z-Wave  sensors,  switches,  door  locks,
thermostats, and more from various manufacturers
. All mains-powered Z-Wave devices in your
network (e.g. plug-in modules, wired switches) will act as signal repeaters to strengthen the mesh network,
regardless of vendor
. This means you can mix and match device brands freely; Home Assistant will
interpret their signals via the Z-Wave stick’s radio.
Common Z-Wave Device Types and Home Assistant Support:
Device Type
Home Assistant Entity
Type
Notes on Setup and Use
Smart Switch/
Plug
switch  or light  entity
(toggle on/off, brightness
if dimmer)
Include like any Z-Wave device. Once added, you can
control it via HA UI or automations. Mains-powered
switches extend the Z-Wave mesh.
Light Dimmer
light  entity (with
brightness control)
Dimmers show up as lights with brightness sliders.
They repeat signals (if not battery-powered) and
support “multilevel switch” commands for smooth
dimming.
Door/Window
Sensor
binary_sensor  (open/
closed) and possibly 
sensor  (battery level)
These battery-powered contact sensors report open/
closed status. They appear as binary_sensor entities
(often classed as door or window). Home Assistant
will show their state changes for use in alarms or
automations.
1
2
1

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Device Type
Home Assistant Entity
Type
Notes on Setup and Use
Motion Sensor
binary_sensor  (motion
detected/clear) and 
sensor  (battery,
illumination, etc.)
Motion or PIR sensors show as binary_sensors. Many
multi-sensors also provide temperature, light,
humidity, etc., as separate sensor entities. They may
need a manual wake-up after inclusion to send all
info.
Smart Lock
lock  entity (lock/unlock)
and sensors (battery,
status)
Z-Wave door locks are fully supported – you can lock/
unlock from HA and see lock status. Secure
inclusion (S0/S2) is required for locks. Home
Assistant’s Z-Wave JS handles S2 security (you’ll enter
the lock’s DSK/PIN during inclusion). Once paired,
locks can be controlled via HA or voice assistants.
Thermostat
climate  entity (with
temperature setpoints,
mode, etc.)
Z-Wave thermostats appear as climate devices,
allowing you to read current temperature and adjust
heating/cooling setpoints in HA. Some may also
expose extra sensors (ambient temp, humidity).
Include them like other devices; if they support S2
security, include securely.
Siren/Alarm
switch  or specialized
alarm control (depending
on model)
Many Z-Wave sirens present as switches (on=alarm
sound, off=silent). More advanced sirens might allow
selecting tones via config parameters or a siren
entity. You can incorporate them into security
automations (e.g. trigger on intrusions).
Multi-Button
Remote or
Scene
Controller
No permanent entity
(triggers events for button
presses)
Handheld remotes or wall scene controllers often
don’t show up as entities. Instead, they send Z-Wave 
Central Scene events that Home Assistant can listen
for in automations
. You can use the Event
trigger in HA to react to button presses (e.g. to
toggle lights).
Home Assistant’s Z-Wave JS integration supports both  Classic Inclusion (putting the controller in add/
inclusion mode and activating inclusion on the device) and SmartStart (where you scan a device’s QR code
before powering it on, and it joins automatically)
. SmartStart is available with 700-series controllers and
SmartStart-capable devices – if you have newer devices with a QR code, Home Assistant allows you to scan it
during inclusion for a simplified pairing process
. For classic inclusion, you’ll use Home Assistant’s
interface to initiate adding a device, then follow the device’s manual (e.g. pressing a button or sequence to
include). We will cover the inclusion process in detail later.
Security & S2 vs S0: Modern Z-Wave devices (especially locks, garage controllers, etc.) often use Security S2
encryption, which is strongly preferred over the older S0. S2 provides encryption with minimal overhead,
whereas S0 adds a lot of extra network traffic and can slow down your Z-Wave mesh
. Home Assistant
will  automatically use S2 if both the controller and device support it, and will only fall back to S0 if
necessary
. In practice, this means include  locks and other security-critical devices with S2 whenever
3
4
5
6
7
2

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------

possible – Home Assistant will prompt you to enter the device’s 5-digit PIN (from the device’s QR code or
manual) during inclusion to authenticate S2. Older Z-Wave locks that only support S0 will still work (enter
the network key to include securely), but be aware of the heavier traffic load with S0
. We’ll ensure the
proper keys are set up for secure inclusion in the configuration steps.
Installing Home Assistant Natively on macOS Ventura
Running Home Assistant “natively” on macOS means installing it directly on the Mac’s OS (as a program)
rather than using a virtual appliance or dedicated device. On a 2017 iMac (Intel-based) with macOS Ventura,
you can install Home Assistant Core – the Python-based application – and run it as a service. Below are
step-by-step instructions:
1. Prepare the System (Python Environment): macOS Ventura does not include an up-to-date Python 3 by
default, so first ensure you have Python 3.10+ installed. You can download the official Python installer from
python.org or install via Homebrew ( brew install python ). Verify that running python3 --version
in Terminal shows a 3.x version. It’s recommended to create a Python  virtual environment for Home
Assistant to avoid conflicts with other Python packages
, though this is optional. To create a venv (if
using the built-in venv  module):
# In Terminal, create a folder for Home Assistant and a virtual environment
mkdir -p ~/HomeAssistant && cd ~/HomeAssistant
python3 -m venv venv
# create a virtual env named "venv"
source venv/bin/activate
# activate the virtual environment
Once activated (you’ll see the env name in your shell prompt), you’re ready to install Home Assistant.
2. Install Home Assistant: Use pip to install the Home Assistant Core package. In Terminal, run: 
pip install homeassistant
This will download and install Home Assistant and its dependencies. The process may take a few minutes. (If
you see any errors during installation, ensure that you have the Xcode command-line tools installed by running
xcode-select --install .) After a successful install, you will have the  hass  command available in
your Python environment
.
3. Initial Launch and Onboarding: Start Home Assistant by running: 
hass
8
9
10
3

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 4
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The first startup will take several minutes as Home Assistant builds the initial configuration and downloads
some default integrations. You’ll see log output in the Terminal. Wait until you see messages indicating that
Home Assistant is running and serving on port 8123. By default, it runs on http://localhost:8123
. 
First-Time Setup: Open a web browser on the iMac and navigate to http://localhost:8123 .
You should see the Home Assistant onboarding screen. Follow the prompts to create an admin user
account, set your location/time zone, and optionally enable telemetry. Once completed, you’ll reach
the Home Assistant dashboard (which will be mostly empty until we add integrations/devices).
Allow Network Access (optional): If you want to access Home Assistant from other devices on your
network (e.g. your phone or laptop), make sure the Mac’s firewall allows port 8123 or that you
configure Home Assistant to listen on all interfaces. By default, Home Assistant should bind to all
network interfaces. You can test by visiting http://<YourMac’sIP>:8123  from another device. If
it doesn’t connect, check macOS Firewall settings in System Settings > Network > Firewall and add
a rule to allow incoming connections for Python or Home Assistant. 
4. Running Home Assistant in the Background: When launched via Terminal, Home Assistant will run as
long as that session is open. To avoid having to start it manually each time, you can set it up to run in the
background or on boot: -  Launch Daemon/Agent: Home Assistant provides a convenience script for
macOS to set it up as a Launch Daemon. You can run  hass --script macos install  (in your
virtualenv) to register Home Assistant to start at boot and run as a background service. This will create a
plist in ~/Library/LaunchAgents  to auto-start Home Assistant on login. If that script doesn’t work on
Ventura or you prefer manual setup, you can create a Launch Agent plist file yourself pointing to the hass
executable. - Prevent Sleep: Since you’re running on an iMac, you likely plan to keep it on 24/7 as a server.
Go  to  System  Settings  >  Battery  >  Power  Adapter and  enable  “Prevent  computer  from  sleeping
automatically when the display is off.” This ensures your Mac stays running Home Assistant continuously
(the display can sleep, but the machine stays awake to run automations). Also disable “Put hard disks to
sleep” and verify no aggressive sleep timers are set. If the Mac does sleep, Home Assistant (and your Z-
Wave network control) will pause until it wakes.
5. Home Assistant Interface Basics: Once Home Assistant is up, familiarize yourself with the sidebar. Key
areas we will use: - Settings > Devices & Services: where you add integrations (like Z-Wave) and manage
devices. -  Settings > System > Logs: to view logs (useful for troubleshooting). -  Developer Tools: for
advanced tasks (seeing events, states, etc., which can help in automation creation or debugging).
Tip: Although we focus on native installation, be aware there’s an alternative one-click method: an unofficial
“Home Assistant Server” app on the Mac App Store that packages Home Assistant OS in a lightweight
VM. Some users opt for it for convenience (it costs a few dollars)
. If you prefer a simple GUI
approach and don’t mind using a bundled VM, that app can automate much of the setup. However, the
native install we just did is free and gives you full control and easy access to Home Assistant’s files. Now,
with Home Assistant running, we’ll proceed to configure Z-Wave by connecting your Zooz USB stick.
Setting Up the Zooz S7 Z-Wave USB Stick on macOS
The Zooz “S7” stick (Zooz ZST10 700 Series S2 USB stick) will serve as the Z-Wave radio controller for Home
Assistant. Setting it up on macOS Ventura is straightforward since no special driver is required – it uses
the built-in USB serial drivers on macOS
. Here’s how to get it connected and recognized:
11
• 
• 
12
13
14
4

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 5
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Plug in the Zooz Z-Wave Stick: Insert the Zooz ZST10 700 stick into a USB port on your iMac. Use a USB
2.0/3.0 Type-A port on the back of the iMac (2017 models have 4 USB-A ports). Avoid USB hubs if possible
during initial setup, or use a powered hub to ensure the stick has sufficient power. Many users also
recommend using a short USB extension cable to position the stick a few inches away from the computer’s
chassis – this can reduce any interference from the Mac’s electronics and improve radio range
 (Z-Wave
operates at ~908 MHz, which isn’t as susceptible to USB 3.0 interference as 2.4 GHz devices, but spacing out
the radio is still good practice).
2. Confirm macOS Recognizes the Stick: macOS Ventura should detect the stick automatically as a USB
modem device. You can verify this in a couple of ways: -  System Information: Open  Applications >
Utilities > System Information, and look under USB. You should see an entry for a device (possibly labeled
with a generic name or chipset). For example, it might appear as “Silicon Labs CP210x” or a CDC device. The
Zooz 700 stick uses the standard USB CDC (Communications Device Class) interface, so it could show up as a
modem. - Network Preferences: macOS might prompt you with a message like “New network interface
detected” for the USB modem. If you go to System Settings > Network, you may see an entry for a device
(e.g., “usbmodem14101” or similar). You do not need to configure this as an internet connection – you
can ignore the network settings. The presence of this interface means macOS has recognized the USB stick.
According  to  Zooz,  on  Mac  “the  device  will  display  as  /dev/cu.usbmodem  under  Network
settings”
. In Ventura’s Settings UI, it might show up with a slightly different name (including numbers).
This is the serial port Home Assistant will use.
3. Find the Device Path: Home Assistant needs the path to the serial port for the Z-Wave stick. On macOS,
serial devices appear as files under /dev . Open Terminal and list the devices by running: 
ls /dev/cu.*
(the “cu” devices are the ones used for serial communications on Mac). You should see something like /
dev/cu.usbmodemXXXX  (the suffix can be a mix of numbers/letters). That is your Zooz stick. For example,
it might be /dev/cu.usbmodem141101  or /dev/cu.usbmodem001 . Note this full path for use in Home
Assistant. (You might also see a similar /dev/tty.usbmodemXXXX  – typically you’ll use the “cu” version for
initiating connections.)
No driver installation is needed for Zooz sticks on Mac. The stick uses Apple’s built-in driver (present since OS
X), so once it shows up as a device, you’re set
. If it doesn’t appear at all in /dev/ , try unplugging and
replugging the stick, and ensure the LED (if any on the stick) lights up. Also, check that the USB port is
functioning and not a power-only port.
4. Permissions and Access: Usually, your user account on macOS can access USB serial devices without
extra  configuration.  Unlike  Linux,  there’s  no  dialout  group  to  configure.  However,  the  device  node’s
permissions can be checked by ls -l /dev/cu.usbmodemXXXX . It should be accessible to system users.
If you run Home Assistant as your own user (as we did in the venv), it should be able to open the port. If
Home Assistant is unable to access the port, you might need to run it with elevated privileges or adjust
ownership, but this is rarely an issue on Mac. (If using Docker, we’ll cover container access to USB in the
Docker section.)
15
16
14
5

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 6
------------------------------------------------------------------------

At this stage, the hardware is connected and recognized by the OS. Next, we will configure Home Assistant’s
Z-Wave integration to use this stick and set up the Z-Wave JS server that manages the network.
Configuring the Z-Wave Integration in Home Assistant
Home Assistant uses a component called Z-Wave JS to interface with Z-Wave networks. The integration has
two parts: a Z-Wave JS Server (which runs separately and communicates with the USB stick), and the Home
Assistant Z-Wave integration which connects to that server. In Home Assistant OS/Supervised installations,
the server runs as an add-on. In our macOS manual setup, we need to run the Z-Wave server ourselves
(since we don’t have the add-on system). We’ll set it up and then add the integration in Home Assistant.
1. Install/Run the Z-Wave JS Server: The easiest way to run the Z-Wave JS Server (with a nice control UI) on
a Mac is via Docker. (If you prefer not to use Docker at all, you would have to install Node.js and run the Z-
Wave JS UI app from source, which is complex. Docker is recommended by the developers in this case
.) We’ll outline the Docker method here, but if you absolutely cannot use Docker, you could run Home
Assistant in a VM with Home Assistant OS or attempt a manual Node.js setup. 
Using Docker for Z-Wave JS UI: Ensure you have Docker Desktop installed on macOS. Then, you can launch
the Z-Wave JS UI container (formerly known as zwavejs2mqtt, but it now encompasses the primary Z-Wave
JS server plus an optional MQTT interface and web UI). Open Terminal and run:
docker run -d \
--name zwave-js-ui --restart unless-stopped \
-p 8091:8091 -p 3000:3000 \
-e TZ=America/Toronto \
-e SESSION_SECRET=mysecret \
-v ~/HomeAssistant/zwave-js-store:/usr/src/app/store \
--device /dev/cu.usbmodemXXXX:/dev/ttyACM0 \
zwavejs/zwave-js-ui:latest
Let’s break down this command: - It downloads/runs the zwavejs/zwave-js-ui  image (latest version). -
Maps port 8091 (the web management UI) and 3000 (the Z-Wave JS WS server) to your Mac. - Sets timezone
(optional) and a session secret for the UI. - Binds the USB device: we map our Mac’s /dev/
cu.usbmodemXXXX  to the container’s /dev/ttyACM0 . Inside the container (which runs Linux), the stick
will be accessible as /dev/ttyACM0 . - Data is stored in ~/HomeAssistant/zwave-js-store  on the
Mac (adjust path as needed). The container will keep network info and config there.
Once this container is running, it is the Z-Wave JS server. You can open http://localhost:8091  in a
browser to access the Z-Wave JS UI panel. On first load, it will ask you to set a username/password for the
admin interface. Then under  Settings > Z-Wave, set the  Serial Device to  /dev/ttyACM0  (which we
mapped) and hit Save. It should connect to the stick and indicate your controller (showing something like
“Zooz ZST10 700” with its Node ID 1). Also in settings, ensure “WS Server” is enabled on port 3000 (it usually
is by default). This WebSocket server is what Home Assistant will talk to.
17
18
6

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Alternative: If not using Docker, the process would be: install Node.js, download the Z-Wave JS UI release,
and run it manually. This is beyond the scope of this guide, but know that it’s possible (just more difficult to
maintain). Docker container is the recommended approach for non-HAOS installs
.
2. Add the Z-Wave Integration in Home Assistant: Now that the Z-Wave JS server is running, we integrate
it with Home Assistant: - In Home Assistant’s web UI, navigate to Settings > Devices & Services. - Click “Add
Integration” (the + button) and search for “Z-Wave” in the list. Select “Z-Wave JS” (it may just show as “Z-
Wave” with the logo). - Home Assistant will start the integration setup. Since we’re not using Home
Assistant’s own add-on, when it asks about the Z-Wave JS add-on, opt to “Install Manually” or uncheck
any option to use the Supervisor add-on (that option only applies to HA OS/Supervised)
. Then it
will prompt for the Z-Wave JS Server connection. - Enter the WebSocket URL for the server. If you ran the
Docker as above on the same machine, it would be ws://localhost:3000 . (If Home Assistant is in a
container and Z-Wave JS in another, you’d use the appropriate host name or container name and port; on
our native setup, localhost and port 3000 is correct.) Submit this info. - Next, it may ask for the network key
if you haven’t set up any. Since we already have Z-Wave JS UI running, it likely generated keys for S0 and S2
for us. If Home Assistant asks, you can leave fields blank to let it generate keys automatically
. In fact,
Home Assistant or Z-Wave JS will ensure keys exist. The network keys (especially S0) are important for
secure inclusion of older devices
. Home Assistant will generate unique 16-byte hex keys if none are
provided
. You can later view or change these in the Z-Wave JS UI or Home Assistant configs. Be sure to
save these keys in a secure place if you plan to back up or migrate – you’ll need the same keys to
seamlessly move your stick to another system or to re-include secure devices
. - After submitting,
Home Assistant will connect to the Z-Wave JS server. If successful, you’ll see a message that the integration
was added. In the Devices & Services list, Z-Wave JS will show up with 1 device (the Z-Wave controller itself).
You can click it to see the controller info. This confirms Home Assistant is now linked to your Zooz stick via
the Z-Wave server.
Troubleshooting: If Home Assistant cannot connect: - Double-check the WS URL. If using Docker on Mac,
localhost:3000  works  because  the  container  shares  network  via  Docker  Desktop  proxy.  If  using
another host or VM, use that IP/hostname. - Make sure no firewall is blocking that port 3000. - Ensure the Z-
Wave JS UI container shows “Listening on 0.0.0.0:3000” in its logs and that it’s running. - If you accidentally
left the “use add-on” option checked, the integration might be waiting for an add-on that doesn’t exist.
Remove the integration and re-add, being careful to select manual setup.
3. Verify the Controller in Home Assistant: In HA, go to Settings > Devices & Services, find Z-Wave JS,
and click  “Configure”. You should see info about your Z-Wave stick (home ID, node ID 1, name of the
controller). If you open the Z-Wave JS UI (at port 8091) concurrently, you’ll see the same controller listed.
Now you’re ready to add devices to your Z-Wave network.
Note: The  Z-Wave  network  itself  (pairings  of  devices)  is  stored  on  the  stick’s  memory  (NVM).  Home
Assistant, however, will interview devices and cache additional info (like names, entity mappings) in its own
config. On first setup, since our controller has no devices yet, there’s nothing to interview. When you do add
devices, if you ever restart Home Assistant, it will re-interview devices to get their state (it won’t lose them, it
just queries them on startup to sync state)
. For battery devices, this means they might show as
“initializing” until their next wake-up. You can speed it up by manually waking them after a HA restart
. 
Now we have Home Assistant and Z-Wave JS all set. Next, we’ll add various Z-Wave devices and discuss any
special procedures for each type.
19
18
20
21
22
23
22
24
25
26
26
7

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Including Z-Wave Devices: Sensors, Switches, Locks, Thermostats,
etc.
Adding (including) devices to your Z-Wave network is done via the Home Assistant interface (or Z-Wave JS
UI). Home Assistant provides a guided inclusion process. The general steps to include any device are:
Initiate Add Device (Inclusion Mode): In Home Assistant, go to Settings > Devices & Services >
Integrations > Z-Wave JS (Configure). Click “Add Device”. This will put the Z-Wave controller into
inclusion mode (listening for new device join requests)
. Alternatively, you can click the  Add
Integration -> Z-Wave shortcut (My Home Assistant link) if available
. The UI will indicate it’s
searching for new devices.
Activate Device Inclusion: Now follow your device’s manual to put it into inclusion/pairing mode.
This often involves pressing a button or toggle on the device:
Battery sensors (door/window, motion): usually have a small pinhole or button to press 3 times quickly,
or a specific inclusion button. 
Plug-in switches/dimmers: often a button tap or long-press.
In-wall switches/dimmers: toggling the switch on/off a certain way or pressing a config button.
Locks: typically require entering a programming code or pressing a “learn” button. For instance,
Schlage locks have a sequence of entering a programming code then ‘0’ to include.
Thermostats: often a menu option or special button combination to include.
Ensure  the  device  is  near  the  controller (at  least  for  secure  inclusion,  being  within  a  few  feet  is
recommended for locks). When the device is triggered to include, it will send a node add request.
Secure Inclusion Prompts: If the device supports S2 security, Home Assistant will pop up a dialog
asking for the PIN or QR code. Enter the 5-digit PIN from the device’s QR label (usually on the device
or in the manual). This is part of S2 authentication. Submit the PIN; Home Assistant will complete the
secure key exchange. (If the device supports SmartStart and you had scanned its QR earlier, you wouldn’t
need to do this live — it would join automatically when powered on. But for classic inclusion, entering the
PIN is needed for S2.) For  S0 devices, no dialog appears because Home Assistant will use the S0
network key behind the scenes. Note that devices requiring S0 (like some older door locks) must be
included with the network key or they won’t function correctly
 – Home Assistant/Z-Wave JS
handles this as long as your network key was set.
Inclusion Confirmation: Watch the Home Assistant UI – it should report that a new device was
added. Give it a moment to interview the device (the controller queries its supported features). You
will then see the device appear in the Devices list under Z-Wave JS, and entities will start showing up.
For example:
A switch might create a switch.lamp_switch  entity.
A multi-sensor might create binary_sensor.motion_hallway , plus 
sensor.hallway_temperature , sensor.hallway_humidity , etc.
A lock creates a lock.front_door  entity (with lock/unlock controls) and possibly sensors for
battery level or door bolt status.
1. 
27
28
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
1. 
29
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
8

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 9
------------------------------------------------------------------------

A thermostat appears as a climate.thermostat  entity with controls for mode and temperature.
If the inclusion fails or times out: Don’t panic – it’s common with battery devices if they sleep too quickly.
You can cancel the inclusion in HA and try again. If a device was partly added (you see a “Node X” with no
info or it’s stuck “Interviewing”), you can remove it (exclusion) and re-add. See below for exclusion steps.
Naming and Location: After inclusion, go to Settings > Devices & Services > Devices, find the new
device (it may have a generic name like “Zooz Unknown: id=xxxx” initially). Click it, then click the
pencil icon to rename the device to something friendly (e.g. “Kitchen Motion Sensor”). You can also
assign it to an Area (room) in Home Assistant which helps organize your entities. Naming devices in
Home Assistant does  not affect the Z-Wave network itself, but it will make your frontend and
automations much easier to manage.
Battery Device Tip: For battery-powered devices, wake them up a few times after inclusion so
that Home Assistant can finish interviewing and get all info (like supported sensors, configuration
options). Waking up usually means pressing the inclusion button once (check the manual). Until a
device is fully interviewed, some entities may not appear yet or it may show as “unknown device”
manufacturer. Waking it ensures Home Assistant receives all details. You’ll know it’s fully interviewed
when the device has proper name/manufacturer info and all expected entities.
Special Considerations by Device Type:
Sensors (Door/Window, Motion, etc.): These often use sleepy operation to conserve battery. They
wake up on a schedule (e.g. every 4 hours) to report in. If you change a configuration (like motion
timeout), you must wait for or trigger a wake-up to send that config. When included, Home Assistant
will list their state as on/off (open/closed, motion/clear). You can use these in automations (e.g. turn
on lights when motion detected). Many sensors also send a  battery level which shows up as a
sensor in HA. Note that  some sensors do not automatically update their status in HA if manually
triggered repeatedly in short succession – they might have a timeout or send a single “active” report
and then an “all clear” after some time. This is normal for motion sensors (to avoid spamming). You
can adjust settings in the device (via Z-Wave config parameters accessible in HA’s device config or Z-
Wave JS UI) if needed to fine-tune behavior.
Lights and Switches: These are typically straightforward. Once added, you can control them from
Home Assistant UI or via voice (if you integrate with Siri/Alexa/etc). If a switch supports dimming, it
will appear as a Light entity with a brightness slider. Home Assistant will automatically categorize
many known Z-Wave devices (if the device database recognizes them). If a device appears just as a
generic  switch  but  you  expected  a  light,  you  can  change  the  entity’s  domain  by  using  a
customization (or just treat it as a switch – it’s functionally similar). Most Z-Wave light switches report
their physical state back to the controller (if you toggle the switch by hand, Home Assistant will get
an update). If you encounter a switch that doesn’t update when manually toggled, it might be an
older model that lacks instant status – the workaround could be to enable polling for that node (not
ideal, but possible – see Troubleshooting). Generally,  new Z-Wave Plus switches report state
instantly via the Lifeline association, so you should see near real-time updates in HA.
Door Locks: When including a Z-Wave lock, it’s best to have the lock close to the USB stick. Z-Wave
locks often use a special low-power inclusion mode for security, which means if they’re too far, the
6. 
1. 
2. 
• 
• 
• 
9

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 10
------------------------------------------------------------------------

secure key exchange might fail. If your lock is already installed on a door far from the iMac, consider
temporarily moving the iMac (or use a long USB cable on the stick) closer for pairing, or pair the lock
before mounting it. During inclusion, after entering the S2 PIN, wait patiently – locks can take a bit to
securely exchange keys. Once included, you’ll get a lock.<name>  entity. You can lock/unlock from
HA, include it in dashboards, and in automations (e.g. lock doors at 10 PM automatically). Home
Assistant will also show the lock’s status (locked/unlocked) and battery. You might also see a sensor
for “alarm level” or “alarm type” on some locks – those are device-specific and indicate things like bad
pin attempts or door tamper alarms. You can use KeyMaster (a third-party integration) if you want
an easier UI to manage lock PIN codes via Home Assistant, since by default changing user codes
requires sending Z-Wave config parameters.
Thermostats: Z-Wave thermostats integrate as climate entities. After inclusion, you can set modes
(heat/cool/auto/off depending on device) and adjust the target temperature. If the thermostat
supports fan modes or hold modes, those may appear as additional controls. The current ambient
temperature is usually provided by the thermostat as a sensor or as part of the climate entity. You
might have separate entities for things like humidity or battery (if it’s a battery-operated thermostat).
One thing to note: some thermostats (battery ones) wake up periodically; if you send a setpoint
change from HA, it might not take effect until the device wakes (it should happen within a few
minutes  if  wakeup  is  configured).  Mains-powered  (or  C-wire  powered)  thermostats  are  always
listening and updates should apply immediately.
Others (Sirens, Garage Door Openers, etc.): These devices each have quirks. Sirens usually behave
like switches as mentioned. Garage door openers (using the Barrier Operator command class)
appear as cover entities in Home Assistant (with open/close controls). For example, a Z-Wave garage
controller will have a cover.garage_door  entity. Home Assistant’s Z-Wave JS supports the barrier
operator class, allowing you to open/close and see door status. If you include one, make sure to test
that it reports the correct status. Secure inclusion is usually required for these as well.
SmartStart Inclusion: If you buy new Z-Wave devices that support SmartStart (common with 700 series
devices), you have the option to use SmartStart: In Z-Wave JS UI, you can go to Control Panel > SmartStart
and add the device’s DSK (by scanning QR code) before powering the device. Home Assistant’s integration
also offered a “Scan QR code” during add device
. If you scanned it and added, the device will join
automatically within a few minutes of being powered on (no need to manually trigger inclusion). This can
simplify inclusion for multiple devices – you could scan all their codes, then power them on one by one and
watch them appear. SmartStart is optional; classic inclusion works for all devices.
Exclusion (Removing a Device): If you ever need to remove a device from your Z-Wave network (to reset it
or to move it to a new controller), you should use the  Remove Device (exclusion) function in Home
Assistant before physically disposing or reusing the device. To do this, go to Settings > Devices & Services >
Z-Wave JS (Configure) and click  “Remove Device”, then “Start Exclusion”
. Then perform the device’s
exclusion procedure (usually the same as inclusion procedure – pressing the button, etc.). Home Assistant
will confirm it removed a device if the signal went through
. This will factory reset that device’s Z-Wave
pairing, and it will disappear from your HA device list. If a device was never paired to your network and you
can’t add it, doing an exclusion first can help (it might have been paired to some other network out of the
box). The Z-Wave stick can exclude any Z-Wave device (even one paired to a different hub) – this just resets
the device’s own memory of its network.
• 
• 
4
30
31
10

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 11
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Important Inclusion Tips: - Do not use the button on the Z-Wave USB stick to include devices (if your
stick has one). The Zooz 700 stick (S2) doesn’t have an inclusion button at all (older sticks like Aeotec had
one), so this may not apply. But in general, inclusion should be done through Home Assistant’s interface.
Including via the stick alone can cause Home Assistant to not know about the new node, and it can also lead
to “phantom” nodes or broken routes
. Home Assistant’s documentation explicitly says to avoid initiating
inclusion from the stick directly
. - When including devices,  don’t move the USB stick around the
house. In older Z-Wave practices, people took the stick to devices (using battery power on the stick) to
include. This is not needed now and is discouraged
. Including in place (with a strong mesh or bringing
the device near the hub temporarily) is the way to go. If your device is too far for initial inclusion, consider a
portable inclusion (bringing the device closer) rather than moving the primary controller. Moving the
controller can mess up routing tables because when you plug it back in, it’s now far from where it was when
devices were added.  Best practice: include devices roughly in their intended location if possible, using
mains repeaters as needed to extend range. - Device Interview: After inclusion, the Z-Wave JS integration
does an interview process (querying supported command classes, versions, etc.). You can monitor this via
the Z-Wave JS UI or Home Assistant logs. Wait until it’s done (device shows as “Complete”) before heavily
using the device or creating automations, to ensure HA has all the info. If an interview fails (e.g., device
battery died during it), you can re-interview the node later via the Z-Wave JS UI interface. - Naming Devices:
It’s helpful to name not only the device, but also customize entity names (especially if a multi-sensor
provides generic names). You can do this in Home Assistant’s  Entities list or by clicking the entity and
editing. For example, rename “Sensor 2 temperature” to “Living Room Temperature”. This makes it easier to
identify in the UI and scripts.
With devices now included, you can integrate them into Home Assistant scenes and automations (e.g. turn
on Z-Wave lights when a Z-Wave motion sensor triggers, lock doors when a Zigbee button is pressed – any
mix is possible since HA centralizes them).
Home Automation Tips, Best Practices, and Optimizations
Setting up your devices is just the first step – now you’ll want to leverage Home Assistant to create
automations and ensure your smart home runs reliably and securely. Below are some best practices and
tips for managing a Z-Wave network in Home Assistant, especially on a macOS-based setup:
Ensure a Strong Z-Wave Mesh: Z-Wave is a mesh network, so the more mains-powered nodes you
have, the more pathways signals have. If your iMac (with the Zooz stick) is centrally located, that’s
great. If not, consider adding a few plug-in outlets or repeaters in distant areas to relay signals.
Remember, all non-battery Z-Wave devices act as repeaters by design
. For example, if a door
lock at the far end of the house is having connectivity issues, a Z-Wave smart plug halfway between
can significantly help by forwarding commands. You can view the network topology in Z-Wave JS UI’s
Network Graph (it can draw a web of node connections) to identify weak spots.
USB Placement and Interference: As mentioned, use a short USB extension cable to position the Z-
Wave stick a short distance from the Mac. Interference can come from the Mac’s USB 3.0 ports or
other electronics. Many users have reported that moving the stick just a foot away on an extension
resolves issues like devices failing to include or delayed responses
. Also, keep it away from
large metal surfaces (don’t sandwich it between the iMac and a metal desk). Since the iMac 5K has a
large aluminum body, having the stick on a short lead away from the back can improve their line-of-
32
32
32
• 
33
34
• 
15
35
11

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 12
------------------------------------------------------------------------

sight to devices. Avoid coiling the cable with other cables which might cause EMI. Essentially, treat
the stick like a little antenna that needs some breathing room.
Preventing macOS Sleep: We touched on this, but it’s worth reiterating: if the iMac goes to sleep,
Home Assistant and the Z-Wave server will pause, meaning automations and device control won’t
work until it wakes. For a reliable home automation system, keep the Mac awake 24/7 (use display
sleep only). You can also use the caffeinate  command in macOS to temporarily prevent sleep
when needed. Since this iMac might be a dedicated server, you could also set it to auto-login and
start Home Assistant on boot for resilience after power outages or macOS updates.
Backup Your Home Assistant Config: Regularly back up the Home Assistant configuration directory
(by default,  ~/.homeassistant  in a core install). This includes the entity registry and Z-Wave
integration info stored by HA. While the Z-Wave network itself lives on the stick, having a backup of
HA means if you migrate to another machine, you won’t have to set up all your devices and names
from scratch. Also, backup your Z-Wave stick’s NVM if possible. The Z-Wave JS UI container has a
feature to backup the controller’s data (NVM backup). Use that to save a file of your network. In case
the stick fails, this file can be restored to a new stick of the same series (700 series to 700 series)
. Migrating between different series (700 to 800) is more complex but tools are evolving to
support it
.
Secure Your Home Assistant: Since Home Assistant will be controlling locks and possibly alarm
sensors, make sure you secure access to it. Use a strong password for your HA user, consider
enabling 2FA. If you expose HA outside your network (for mobile access), use HTTPS (you can use
Nabu Casa cloud or set up your own SSL via Let’s Encrypt). On the Mac itself, keep it up-to-date and
don’t disable its firewall entirely (just allow HA’s port). Also, limit admin access – if others in your
home use HA, create non-admin users for them. This prevents accidental changes to critical settings.
Use Automations and Scenes: Home Assistant’s automation engine lets you tie together your Z-
Wave devices with any other integrations. Some example ideas:
Lighting automations: Use motion sensors to turn on Z-Wave lights for a few minutes when motion is
detected. Or use door sensors to trigger foyer lights on when a door opens at night.
Security: If you have Z-Wave door/window sensors on an alarm panel, you can create an alarm
system in HA (or use the Alarmo integration for a ready-to-use alarm control panel). This can trip
sirens (Z-Wave or otherwise) when intrusion is detected. You can also have your Z-Wave locks trigger
an automation – e.g., if a lock is unlocked after 10pm, have HA send you a notification or turn on
indoor lights.
Lock User Codes: If you install the custom KeyMaster integration, you get a nice UI to manage PIN
codes for Z-Wave locks (schedule codes, one-time codes for guests, etc.). This is very handy for smart
locks as it abstracts the Z-Wave Command Class for lock codes into an easy interface.
Thermostat Schedules: With HA you can bypass the limited scheduling in many thermostats and use
HA to create daily schedules or integrate with presence. For instance, if no one is home (perhaps
detected via a Z-Wave motion sensor or HA’s Home/Away status), HA could set back the thermostat
to save energy. In the morning, set a comfortable temp, etc. There are community plugins like
Scheduler Card that can help create scheduling UI.
• 
• 
36
37
38
39
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
12

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 13
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Energy monitoring: If you have Z-Wave power plugs that report energy usage, you can track those in
HA’s Energy dashboard. This can help identify consumption patterns (e.g., how much power your Z-
Wave space heater plug is drawing). Make sure to add the energy sensor to the Energy config.
Voice Control: You can integrate HA with Google Assistant or Alexa (via Nabu Casa cloud or manual
setup) – then all your Z-Wave devices can be voice-controlled. For example, “Alexa, lock the front
door” or “Hey Siri, turn on living room lamp” (if using HomeKit integration).
Dashboards: Create Lovelace dashboard views for your security status (locks and sensors), climate
control, etc. The Mushroom or HomeKit Infused dashboard plugins (via HACS) have nice card designs
for locks and lights.
Optimizing  Z-Wave  Performance: Z-Wave  is  generally  low-bandwidth  but  reliable.  To  keep  it
snappy:
Avoid unnecessary polling. By default, Z-Wave JS does not poll devices regularly, which is good
. If you have an older device that doesn’t report state (e.g., a legacy light switch that doesn’t send
updates), you can enable polling for just that device value in Z-Wave JS UI, but do so sparingly
. Polling too often can flood the network and slow everyone down
. A better approach is
event-driven: replace devices with Z-Wave Plus versions that report state, or use automations to
request an update only at specific times (Z-Wave JS provides a zwave_js.refresh_value  service
for on-demand polling of a value)
.
Group commands when possible. If you have a scene that turns off 10 Z-Wave lights at once,
consider creating a Z-Wave scene or using the multicast feature (Z-Wave JS supports multicast to
send one command to multiple nodes). Home Assistant’s UI doesn’t directly expose multicast, but
the zwave_js.multicast_set_value  service is available for advanced use
. Alternatively,
stagger the commands by a few hundred milliseconds in an automation if you notice any
congestion.
Check the Z-Wave JS UI’s  Statistics for your nodes. It can show if certain nodes have a lot of
transmission errors or retries. If a particular device has poor connectivity, addressing that (moving it
or adding a repeater near it) will improve overall network health. The integration provides sensors
for controller/node RTT and lost packets which can be useful for troubleshooting radio issues
.
Firmware Updates for Devices: Some Z-Wave devices allow OTA firmware updates through the
controller. Z-Wave JS UI has support for OTA updates if you have the firmware files. For example, if
Zooz releases a firmware update for your stick or any Zooz device, you can perform the update via
the UI. Be cautious with firmware updates for the  stick itself: Zooz notes that you should only
update the stick’s firmware if absolutely needed, as a failed update could brick the controller
.
The Home Assistant UI may warn if it detects your stick’s firmware has known issues (for instance,
early 700-series firmware had a bug causing dead nodes)
. If you experience instability (e.g.,
the  Zooz  stick  becomes  unresponsive  often),  consider  updating  its  firmware  to  the  latest
recommended version (Zooz provides a Windows tool for this
). Otherwise, “If it ain’t broke,
don’t fix it” applies – don’t rush to update stick firmware just because a new one exists, unless it
specifically addresses a problem you face
. 
Using  Integrations  to  Extend  Functionality: Home  Assistant’s  power  is  in  multi-protocol
integration. Some helpful add-ons or custom integrations specifically for Z-Wave users include:
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
40
41
42
41
43
44
• 
45
• 
46
47
• 
48
49
50
51
52
53
49
• 
13

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 14
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Z-Wave JS UI Add-on: If you ever migrate to an installation of HA that supports add-ons (e.g., a VM
with Home Assistant OS), you can use the Z-Wave JS UI as an add-on instead of Docker. It provides
the same functionality within HA’s Supervisor.
. The benefit is a slightly more integrated
experience and easy updates, but functionally it’s the same as what we set up.
Node-RED: A popular add-on/integration for creating automations via a flowchart interface. You can
use Node-RED (running as a separate app or add-on) to listen for Z-Wave events and create complex
logic. Some users find it more flexible for complex automation than HA’s built-in YAML automations.
It’s optional, but worth exploring if you like visual programming.
HACS (Home Assistant Community Store): This allows installing community-made custom
integrations and frontend plugins. For Z-Wave, you might find custom Lovelace cards like Z-Wave
Network Graph visualizer or battery level charts. Also HACS has KeyMaster (for locks) and other
tools.
Presence and Security: Consider using multiple sensors to enhance reliability. For example, you
might use a Z-Wave motion sensor plus a contact sensor together in an automation (so the light
stays on while either is active). Or combine Z-Wave sensors with other tech (like an IP camera motion
via AI) for verification. Home Assistant lets you create template sensors or groups (e.g., a group of
door sensors that triggers if any open).
Voice and Remote Access: As mentioned, leverage Nabu Casa or HomeKit integration to tie your Z-
Wave gear into voice assistants. It adds a lot of convenience (e.g., tell Siri goodnight and have it lock
doors and turn off lights via HA).
By following these practices, your Home Assistant-driven smart home should be robust and responsive. The
Zooz stick and Home Assistant together provide a  local, no-cloud-required system – which is great for
privacy and reliability. (No dependency on SmartThings or any cloud, which was one motivation for many to
move to HA
.)
Optional: Running Home Assistant (and Z-Wave) in Docker
As  an  alternative  to  the  native  installation,  you  may  consider  deploying  Home  Assistant  in  Docker
containers – either now or in the future. Docker can simplify maintenance (upgrading is as easy as pulling a
new image) and provides environment isolation. Here we outline how you might transition to a Docker-
based setup on your Mac, while still using the Zooz USB stick.
1. Home Assistant Container: The official Docker image for Home Assistant (called homeassistant/home-
assistant) contains Home Assistant Core. It does not include add-ons or the Supervisor, but since we can
run other needed containers (like Z-Wave JS UI), it covers our needs. To run Home Assistant in Docker: -
Install Docker Desktop on your Mac if you haven’t. - Decide on a location for config. For example, create a
folder ~/ha-config  to store Home Assistant config files. - Run the container: 
docker run -d --name home-assistant --restart unless-stopped \
-e TZ=America/Toronto \
-v ~/ha-config:/config \
-p 8123:8123 \
--device /dev/cu.usbmodemXXXX:/dev/ttyUSB0 \
homeassistant/home-assistant:latest
• 
54
• 
• 
• 
• 
55
56
14

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 15
------------------------------------------------------------------------

This maps your Mac’s /dev/cu.usbmodemXXXX  (Zooz stick) into the container as /dev/ttyUSB0 . We
also open port 8123, set timezone, and mount the config volume. Home Assistant inside the container will
see the Z-Wave stick as a serial device at /dev/ttyUSB0 . When you add the Z-Wave integration in this
setup, you would use that path (or better, the /dev/serial/by-id/...  path inside the container if
available – in Docker on Mac, the by-id might not persist, so ttyUSB0 is okay if you only have one USB
device). - The first run will create the config files in ~/ha-config . Just as before, you’d then access HA at 
http://<MacIP>:8123  and do onboarding. - Migrating from native to container: You can copy your
existing config directory ( ~/.homeassistant  from the venv setup) to the new ~/ha-config  before
starting the container. This way all your settings, devices, and integrations carry over. Make sure to update
any path references (for example, the Z-Wave JS server URL might change if you run it differently). - When
running HA in Docker, if you also keep using the Dockerized Z-Wave JS UI we set up, note that now both HA
and Z-Wave JS UI are containers. They can talk over the Docker network. You’d adjust the Z-Wave
integration’s WS URL to point to the Z-Wave container’s address. If using Docker’s default bridge network,
you could connect them by name. A simpler way is to use --network=host  for the Z-Wave JS UI container
on Mac; however, Docker for Mac’s host mode has limitations. It might actually be easier to run both
containers on the same custom bridge network and use container names. For instance, start both home-
assistant and zwavejs containers with --network=home-net  (a user-defined network), then Home
Assistant can connect to ws://zwave-js-ui:3000  if the Z-Wave container is named zwave-js-ui . 
The Docker approach is definitely more advanced, but it gives you a taste of how you could later move
everything into containerized services. Many community guides suggest running Home Assistant, Z-Wave JS
UI, and other services via Docker Compose on an always-on machine (like your iMac, Mac mini, or a Linux
box)
. This iMac is perfectly capable of doing so.
2. Home Assistant OS in a VM (Alternative Expansion): Another route for the future is to use a VM on the
Mac to host Home Assistant OS, which includes the Supervisor and add-on store. This would give you an
experience similar to running it on a Raspberry Pi or dedicated NUC, but using a VM on your iMac. You
could use free tools like UTM or VirtualBox (note: VirtualBox on Apple Silicon is problematic, but on Intel
iMac it works) to create a VM, attach the Home Assistant OS image, and passthrough the USB Z-Wave stick
to it. This VM method might be appealing if you want the full Home Assistant supervised experience (with
one-click add-on installs for things like Z-Wave JS UI, Node-RED, etc.), yet still run on your Mac. There are
community guides for setting up HA OS on Macs (especially for Apple Silicon using UTM)
, as well as
using VMware or Parallels for Intel Macs
. The process typically involves downloading the VHDX or
QCOW2 image of Home Assistant OS and creating a VM with it.
In a VM scenario, you’d attach your Zooz USB stick to the VM (the hypervisor passes the USB through). The
HA OS would then see it likely as /dev/ttyACM0  or by-id, and you’d use the standard Z-Wave JS add-on
inside HA. This is beyond the scope of this document, but keep it in mind if you later decide you want the
convenience of Supervisor (for automatic updates and snapshots). Your iMac is powerful enough to spare a
VM for this purpose.
3. Docker Compose setup (optional): If you get comfortable with Docker, using docker-compose YAML to
define your Home Assistant stack makes it easy to manage. For example, a docker-compose.yml  could
define the homeassistant service, the zwave-js-ui service, an MQTT broker, etc., all with one command to
bring up. This is how many “home server” setups are managed. There are plenty of examples online and
even official references for running HA Container with Z-Wave JS UI in Docker
.
57
58
59
60
61
62
54
63
15

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 16
------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Pros/Cons of Docker on Mac: One thing to note – Docker on macOS uses a lightweight Linux VM under
the hood. There is a small performance overhead and USB passthrough is generally good, but if you notice
any instability with the USB stick in Docker on Mac, the alternative would be running HA directly (which we
did) or using a Linux environment. Most have found Docker on Intel Macs to be fine for Home Assistant and
Z-Wave, but just be aware of that layer. In our steps above, we used container mapping to expose the USB
device; that should work since Docker for Mac will handle connecting that through to the VM. 
In summary, the Docker deployment route is a flexible expansion path. You might stick with the native
Python install for now (especially if it’s working well), but you have the option to containerize the setup to
make upgrades and add-ons easier. Just remember, if you switch methods, always keep backups of your
config and Z-Wave network NVM so you can migrate without re-including all devices.
Troubleshooting Common Issues (macOS + Home Assistant + Z-
Wave)
Even with a solid setup, you may encounter some issues. Here are common problems specific to this setup
and how to address them:
Z-Wave USB Stick Not Detected by Home Assistant: If Home Assistant (or Z-Wave JS UI) can’t find
the Z-Wave stick:
Ensure the stick is listed in /dev/  as discussed. If not, try a different USB port or cable. On a 2017
iMac, all USB-A ports share a bus – if possible test with another device to ensure the port works. 
If the device is listed (e.g. /dev/cu.usbmodem… ) but Home Assistant can’t access it, check
permissions. Running Home Assistant as a normal user should be fine, but if you see errors about
permission denied accessing tty device, you might need to adjust group membership. On macOS,
serial devices often belong to the wheel  or tty  group. Ensure your user is an admin (admin
accounts are essentially in the wheel group). You could also try running Home Assistant with
elevated privileges as a test ( sudo hass ) to see if that resolves it – if it does, it’s a permission issue;
but rather than running HA as root (not recommended long-term), fix the dev node perms. You could
create a udev rule on Mac via etc/dev/  (macOS is not easily configurable in this way, though).
Check that no other application is grabbing the serial port. macOS might create a /dev/
tty.usbmodem  as well – in some cases, software might try to use the modem (though unlikely). If
you opened the Network preferences and clicked “Apply” on the new modem interface, macOS might
“occupy” it. Delete any configuration for the USB modem in Network settings or set it to inactive. This
can free the port. One user noted that on Mac selecting the device in some apps gave a “Line in use”
error
 – meaning another process had it open. Ensure only the Z-Wave JS server is connecting to
it.
If using Docker, double-check the --device  flag. In Docker for Mac, the device path is from the
perspective of the macOS host (which we did). Also ensure the container is running with --
privileged  or specific device access (we did provide the device). Missing that will definitely cause
the container to not see the stick
.
Reboot the iMac if needed. Sometimes the USB stack in macOS can glitch and a device might not
appear until a reboot (or power cycle of the device).
Inclusion Issues (Device not pairing): If you put HA in inclusion mode but the device isn’t found:
• 
• 
• 
• 
64
• 
65
66
• 
• 
16

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 17
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Make sure the device is reset or not already paired to another hub. Perform an exclusion (even on a
brand new device) by putting HA in remove mode and triggering the device. Often a device fresh out
of the box might still need an exclusion if it was factory-tested.
Bring the device closer for inclusion. Sometimes distance is the issue – secure devices especially have
limited inclusion range by design. Once included, you can install them in their final location and
they’ll use mesh hops, but for inclusion try within a few feet of the stick.
Watch the Z-Wave JS UI logs during inclusion (enable debug logging) – it might tell you if a secure
inclusion failed (bad PIN, etc.). If S2 inclusion fails, you might see the device added insecurely (which
for locks means it won’t accept commands). In that case, exclude and re-include, paying attention to
the PIN prompt.
For locks: if inclusion fails repeatedly at S2, try S0 fallback (some locks let you choose a legacy pairing
mode by not entering a PIN – in HA, if you skip the S2 PIN, it might try S0 if the device supports S0).
S0 should only be a last resort (it has heavy overhead
), but it can get a difficult lock paired. After
pairing with S0, you might see a slight battery drain or delay in lock responses due to the extra
frames, but it should work.
Ghost Nodes: If a pairing failed mid-way, you might end up with a “Node XX” that is incomplete.
These are called ghost nodes. They can cause network issues (controller thinks an ID is taken when
device isn’t actually there). It’s best to remove them: In Z-Wave JS UI, you will see the node with no
info – select it and choose “Remove failed node”. You can only remove it if the controller deems it
failed. You might have to mark it as failed first (there’s an option for that). Once it’s removed, the
node ID becomes free for future devices. Always clean up ghosts, as they can otherwise make the
controller try routing through a non-existent node.
Devices Not Updating Status or Seem “Offline”: If a node shows as unavailable or doesn’t update:
Battery devices may sleep. Check the last seen time. Trigger them physically to wake them and see if
HA gets an update.
If a device is marked Dead (in Z-Wave JS UI it might show with a red status), that means the
controller hasn’t gotten a response after multiple tries. This could be due to range or the device
being unplugged (for a plug module) or a power outage. Try healing the node: In Z-Wave JS UI or
HA’s Z-Wave config panel, there’s usually a “heal node” or you can just wait – Z-Wave JS automatically
does some self-healing. A “Heal Network” function can be invoked (in older Z-Wave it was common
to do nightly network-wide heal; Z-Wave JS does not require manual healing as often, it updates
routes on the fly, but if you moved devices, a heal can help).
If a node remains dead, power cycle that device (pull batteries or air-gap a switch, then restore
power). It may come back.
For devices that never report state (older Z-Wave non-plus): consider setting up a refresh
automation. For example, some older dimmers didn’t send instant status – if you need HA to know
when it’s manually toggled, you could poll it every minute or so, or better, when some related event
happens (like motion in the room, assume someone might have toggled the lamp). Use the 
zwave_js.refresh_value  service as needed
. This is a hack and should be last resort due to
the mentioned network traffic issues with polling
.
Check associations: Ensure each device is associated to the controller’s Node 1 in Lifeline. Z-Wave JS
does this automatically, but if you migrated from a different controller, some associations might be
off. Usually not an issue in fresh setups.
• 
• 
• 
• 
8
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
44
43
• 
17

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 18
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Home Assistant Slowdowns or Freezes: If Home Assistant becomes sluggish or unresponsive:
Check the logs (HA logs and system logs). One bad integration (unrelated to Z-Wave) could hang the
event loop. If Z-Wave is suspect, enable debug logging for zwave_js  to see if it’s spamming errors.
If you have a very large Z-Wave network (say 50+ nodes), on an Intel iMac this should still be fine.
The iMac has plenty of CPU/RAM. But after a restart, interviewing many nodes can put load on the
system. It’s best not to restart HA during times you need immediate responsiveness; let it finish the
device interviews first. You can stagger waking battery devices to expedite that process.
The Docker VM on Mac could also cause slowness if it’s constrained. You can allocate more RAM/CPU
to Docker in its settings if needed.
Z-Wave JS UI Access: If you can’t reach the Z-Wave JS UI at its address (localhost:8091 or similar):
Make sure the container is running. Use docker ps  to list running containers.
If it’s running but not reachable, perhaps the port is not published or you’re using host networking
which on Mac might not expose it to your Mac’s localhost. We suggested -p 8091:8091 , so that
should map it. Alternatively, you can check Docker Desktop’s list of containers and see if there’s any
error logs.
Remember, Z-Wave JS UI is optional for day-to-day use – you can do most things in Home Assistant’s
own interface now (like adding/removing devices, setting parameters via the Configure Device page,
etc.). But the UI is very helpful for advanced management (backups, viewing logs).
Firmware  Warnings: Home  Assistant  might  show  a  persistent  notification  if  it  detects  your
controller’s firmware is in a problematic range (for example, a 700 series stick on SDK 7.19). This
warning is informational. As Zooz support notes, unless you are experiencing issues, you can ignore it
safely
. If you do want to update the stick firmware, you’ll typically need a Windows PC (Simplicity
Studio or the Zooz OTA tool)
. It’s a bit of a process (and somewhat risky). So weigh the need.
The community often shares experiences; e.g., some users had improved stability after updating
their Zooz 700 stick to firmware 7.17.2 or above to fix dead node issues
. Check Zooz forums
or Home Assistant community if you’re unsure. And always backup NVM before firmware changes.
macOS Updates: When you update macOS, always check that the Home Assistant service is still
running afterward. A macOS update might reboot the Mac; if you set up LaunchAgent correctly, HA
should start on login. If it didn’t, you may need to log in and start it manually. Also after major
macOS upgrades, re-verify that the USB stick is recognized (sometimes security settings might reset
if, say, kext approvals were needed – but for our CDC device, it shouldn’t be an issue).
Hardware Considerations: The 2017 iMac is powerful and has the advantage of Ethernet (use
Ethernet  for  the  Mac’s  network  connection  if  possible,  rather  than  Wi-Fi,  to  ensure  robust
connectivity for any cloud integrations or remote access). The iMac does consume more power than
a small hub like a Raspberry Pi; if you find it overkill to keep it on 24/7, you could eventually migrate
Home  Assistant  to  a  low-power  device.  But  many  people  repurpose  older  Macs  as  servers
successfully
. As long as the machine is stable, you can rely on it. Keep an eye on the iMac’s
temperature and set appropriate cooling (the HA workload is usually light, but if you also run Plex or
other services as in some user cases
, ensure it has ventilation).
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
49
67
68
69
70
• 
• 
71
72
73
74
18

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 19
------------------------------------------------------------------------

By systematically addressing issues with these tips, you can usually resolve any hiccups in your Home
Assistant Z-Wave setup. The combination of Home Assistant’s detailed logs, Z-Wave JS UI’s network tools,
and the supportive HA community forums will help troubleshoot most problems. Remember, a lot of issues
boil down to either communication range or mis-configuration. With the iMac and Zooz stick configured
as above, you’ve eliminated many potential mis-configurations, so range and device quirks become the
focus – which you can solve by adding repeaters or adjusting device settings as needed.
Conclusion: You now have a fully functional Home Assistant installation on macOS Ventura, integrated with
a Zooz S2 700 Series Z-Wave USB stick, ready to manage a variety of Z-Wave devices. We covered installing
Home  Assistant  natively,  optionally  moving  to  Docker,  pairing  common  device  types,  and  using  best
practices to optimize your smart home’s reliability and security. With this setup, your 2017 iMac becomes a
powerful home automation hub – controlling lights, securing doors, regulating temperature, and much
more, all through Home Assistant’s unified interface. Enjoy your smart home, and happy automating!
Sources:
Home Assistant Z-Wave integration documentation
Zooz ZST10 700 USB Stick user manual
Zooz support knowledge base on Home Assistant & Z-Wave firmware guidance
Home Assistant Community and Reddit discussions on macOS installation and Z-Wave setup
. 
Z-Wave - Home Assistant
https://www.home-assistant.io/integrations/zwave_js/
Home Assistant - A Comprehensive Guide to install Home Assistant on Your Computer
https://mrvautin.com/a-comprehensive-guide-install-home-assistant-on-your-computer/
HA Server on Apple App store : r/homeassistant - Reddit
https://www.reddit.com/r/homeassistant/comments/1ijp6xr/ha_server_on_apple_app_store/
22-3-3-zst10-700-manual.cdr
https://www.getzooz.com/downloads/zooz-700-series-z-wave-stick-zst10-700-manual-online.pdf
ZWavejs2Mqtt with Home Assistant Core (venv) - Z-Wave - Home Assistant Community
https://community.home-assistant.io/t/zwavejs2mqtt-with-home-assistant-core-venv/397944
Z-Wave Stick & Home Assistant: Troubleshooting and Support - Zooz Support Center
https://www.support.getzooz.com/kb/article/1957-z-wave-stick-home-assistant-troubleshooting-and-support/
Aeotec Zwave S2 stick to new 7 series - Z-Wave - Home Assistant Community
https://community.home-assistant.io/t/aeotec-zwave-s2-stick-to-new-7-series/412070
Z-Wave Controllers - Home Assistant
https://www.home-assistant.io/docs/z-wave/controllers/
Setting up Zigbee/Z-wave on a mac - Zigbee - Home Assistant Community
https://community.home-assistant.io/t/setting-up-zigbee-z-wave-on-a-mac/442075
• 
1
32
6
15
• 
14
16
• 
49
• 
17
18
69
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
15
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
35
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
54
63
9
10
11
12
13
14
16
33
34
17
18
19
65
66
36
37
38
39
48
49
50
51
69
70
52
53
67
68
55
56
19

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 20
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thoughts on Running Homeassistant with Z-Wave on a Mac Mini : r/homeassistant
https://www.reddit.com/r/homeassistant/comments/bk9tqe/thoughts_on_running_homeassistant_with_zwave_on_a/
[Guide] Home Assistant on Apple Silicon Mac using HA OS AArch64 ...
https://community.home-assistant.io/t/guide-home-assistant-on-apple-silicon-mac-using-ha-os-aarch64-image/444785
Home Assistant OS on macbook - Configuration
https://community.home-assistant.io/t/home-assistant-os-on-macbook/767942
How to install Home Assistant on Intel macOS for free! - YouTube
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gMUvfLozon0&pp=0gcJCdgAo7VqN5tD
Install Home Assistant Operating System macOS without VirtualBox
https://community.home-assistant.io/t/install-home-assistant-operating-system-macos-without-virtualbox/353666
akauppi/raspberry-pi-zwave-setup: [WIP] Setup of RPi4 + ... - GitHub
https://github.com/akauppi/raspberry-pi-zwave-setup
57
58
71
72
73
74
59
60
61
62
64
20
